Skip to Main Content

AI and Academic Integrity: AI and Academic Integrity

Guidance on how AI tools may be used in student assignments

-

What is Generative Artificial Intelligence?

-

AI and Academic Integrity

- Warning
- Academic Integrity FAQs

-

How to Cite AI

-

AI Tools in Library Databases

-

Challenges and Possibilities of Generative AI

Contact Us

Academic Initiatives and Integrity honesty@uark.edu

University Libraries Ask Us!

Warning

Academic Integrity FAQs

Are students allowed to use generative AI tools to complete academic work?

It depends. Generative AI tools are different across disciplines, and faculty have different philosophical approaches on whether or not to integrate them into their course’s curriculum. Students must receive permission in advance to use any generative AI technology in completing academic work from their instructor. If a student is unsure whether or not they can use a particular resource, it is critical that they ask their instructor for clarification before using it.

How are generative AI and plagiarism connected.

To avoid plagiarizing, students are expected to provide citations for anything that is not their original work. This includes text generated by artificial intelligence. Recent guidance has been posted for the most common citation styles provided on How to Cite AI.

Can generative AI be used in beneficial ways such as synthesizing readings or proofreading my work?

We are just beginning to learn about ways artificial intelligence can be beneficial to the educational environment. AI tools can clearly provide assistance to students in synthesizing readings or proofreading work, but sometimes this assistance may not be allowed by an instructor. It is really important students understand that they must receive permission from their instructors prior to using any resource to complete academic work they submit for credit to avoid being accused of academic dishonesty.

-
Last Updated: Oct 5, 2026 11:43 AM

-
URL: https://libguides.uark.edu/AI

-
Print Page

Login to LibApps

Report a problem

Subjects:

- Citation Managers
- Data Services

University of Arkansas Libraries
365 N. McIlroy Ave.
Fayetteville, AR 72701-4002

- See us on Instagram

- Follow us on Twitter

- Phone: 479-575-4104
