Generative Artificial Intelligence Policy
1.

Purpose
The purpose of this Policy is to establish the baseline requirements to enable the safe, trustworthy
and innovative use of generative artificial intelligence (generative AI) technologies at Te Herenga
Waka–Victoria University of Wellington.

2.

Application of Policy
This Policy applies to all Members of the University Community.
Note: This Policy will not apply to actions, decisions, or conduct related to the use of generative AI
technologies before its effective date as recorded in section 10.

Policy Content
3.

Principles

3.1

The University acknowledges the transformative potential of generative AI technologies in
academic and non-academic settings, as well as the risks associated with their various uses.

3.2

To ensure a balance between potential benefits and risks, the University puts an emphasis on –
(a)

compliance with New Zealand legislation as well as any applicable privacy and data
protection standards;

(b)

consistency with University Policy Documents, values and standards of conduct;

(c)

respecting the needs and interests of te ao Māori as articulated in the Te Tiriti o Waitangi
Statute;

(d)

enhancing digital inclusion and accessibility;

(e)

upholding academic integrity and honesty;

(f)

upskilling Staff Members to support Students in fully developing attributes that align with
the University’s graduate profile;

(g)

advancing capability in AI research and education to become a global leader in discovery,
innovation, and impact;

(h)

observance of copyright, intellectual property, and other contractual requirements;

(i)

ensuring appropriate oversight of AI content generation to mitigate risks, including those
related to cybersecurity, privacy, inaccuracy, bias, misinformation, disinformation and the
reputation of the University;

(j)

thoughtful adoption of new technologies, including sustainability considerations; and

(k)

providing ongoing best practice guidance both within and outside the University
community.

4.

Operations

4.1

This section covers activities at the University that are neither learning and teaching nor research
and applies to Staff Members carrying out such activities. Section 8 provides a definition of
Operations.

Page 1

Generative Artificial Intelligence Policy

9 July 2025

4.2

Generative AI technologies have the potential to assist Staff Members in working more efficiently,
allowing them to focus on the University’s strategic priorities.

4.3

Staff Members are free to use all generative AI technologies except when dealing with information
classified as “confidential” and “internal-use-only” under the University’s Cyber Security
Procedures. Staff Members must only use generative AI technologies approved for Safe Use by
the University when dealing with such types of information. Examples include, but are not limited
to:
(a)

information about an identifiable individual (including biometric information);

(b)

non-public financial, HR, student, and medical records;

(c)

login credentials used for accessing University systems and services (such as account
passwords);

(d)

emails, survey responses, or any other written correspondence through University
systems; and

(e)

third-party intellectual property (including copyrighted material), unless explicitly
permitted by the relevant third party.

Note: Third-party intellectual property is when intellectual property is owned by someone other than
yourself or the University.
Note: Biometric information pertains to an individual’s physical or behavioural features, such as their
face, fingerprints, and voice. This means the requirements above also apply to voice transcription tools.

4.4

To facilitate compliance with clause 4.3, Te Tai Matihiko—Digital Solutions will maintain an
online register of generative AI technologies approved for Safe Use by Staff Members, along with
any restrictions and conditions on their use.

4.5

Staff Members intending to use generative AI technologies as a Safe alternative to those listed in
the University’s register (including those developed internally at the University) must request
approval from Te Tai Matihiko—Digital Solutions. However, approval in such cases will be
contingent upon a Privacy Impact Assessment and data security checks. Where approved, the
relevant generative AI technology will be added to the online register mentioned in clause 4.4.

4.6

Approval of any costs associated with Staff Members accessing generative AI technologies must
comply with the Procurement Policy and the Financial Delegated Authority (FDA) limits set out
in the Delegations Statute.

4.7

The use of generative AI technologies should not serve as a substitute for expert judgment and
critical evaluation by Staff Members.

5.

Learning and Teaching

5.1

Generative AI technologies have the potential to enhance learning and teaching at the University.

5.2

Teaching staff are free to use all generative AI technologies except when dealing with information
classified as “confidential” and “internal-use-only” under the University’s Cyber Security
Procedures. Staff Members must only use of generative AI technologies approved for Safe Use by
the University when dealing with such types of information. Examples include, but are not limited
to:
(a)

those listed under clause 4.3; and

(b)

any student coursework submitted for assessment.

Page 2

Generative Artificial Intelligence Policy

9 July 2025

5.3

To facilitate compliance with clause 5.2, Te Tai Matihiko—Digital Solutions will maintain an
online register of generative AI technologies approved for Safe Use for learning, teaching and
assessment purposes, along with any restrictions and conditions on their use.

5.4

Teaching staff intending to use generative AI technologies as a Safe alternative to those listed in
the University’s register (including those developed internally at the University) must request
approval from Te Tai Matihiko—Digital Solutions. However, approval in such cases will be
contingent upon a Privacy Impact Assessment and data security checks. Where approved, the
relevant generative AI technology will be added to the online register mentioned in clause 5.3.

5.5

Approval of any costs associated with accessing generative AI technologies must comply with the
Procurement Policy and the Financial Delegated Authority (FDA) limits set out in the Delegations
Statute.

5.6

Course coordinators should determine their approaches regarding the student use of generative
AI technologies in their courses and are responsible for clearly communicating their expectations
to Students through their course outline and/or documentation for each assessment item. This
may include permitting or prohibiting the use of generative AI technologies as a whole or in part,
but they must always have regard to the clause 5.12 below when making such decisions.
Note: Course coordinators are encouraged to use the online resources developed and maintained by Te
Waikura–the Academic Office and Te Kōtuinga Mātauranga–Centre for Academic Development. These
resources will be updated more frequently than this Policy.

5.7

Course-related costs must be clearly outlined in the relevant course description. Teaching staff
must not require Students to use generative AI technologies that incur costs for Students other
than those already outlined in the relevant course description.

5.8

Teaching staff intending to use generative AI technologies (including those developed internally
at the University) in teaching activities related to Human Research must obtain approval from
the Human Ethics Committee (HEC) in the regular way before any Relevant Teaching Activities
commence.
Note: More information on Human Research requirements can be found in the Human Ethics Policy and
Human Ethics Guidelines.

5.9

Teaching staff must always be transparent about their use of generative AI technologies with
Students.

5.10 The use of generative AI technologies should not serve as a substitute for expert judgment, and
critical evaluation of student coursework.
Note: Information on the purposes and principles of assessment at the University and associated
responsibilities can be found in the Assessment Handbook.

5.11

Undergraduate and postgraduate students enrolled in coursework degrees must comply with the
Student Academic Integrity Regulation, familiarise themselves with relevant online resources to
learn how to use generative AI technologies without breaching University policies, acknowledge
any use of generative AI technologies in accordance with appropriate citation standards and
library guidance, follow instructions provided by teaching staff, and seek clarification where
needed.

5.12

As a general rule, the unauthorised use of or consultation with generative AI technologies by
undergraduate students and postgraduate students enrolled in coursework degrees to
substantially complete any component of their coursework shall be treated as potential academic
misconduct under the Student Academic Integrity Regulation.

Page 3

Generative Artificial Intelligence Policy

9 July 2025

6.

Research

6.1

Members of the University Community conducting or supervising AI research are free to use all
generative AI technologies (including those developed internally at the University) for research
purposes provided that they comply with this Policy, the Acceptable Use of Information Systems
Statute, Responsible Research Policy, Human Ethics Policy, Intellectual Property Policy, Privacy
Policy, Cyber Security Procedures and other relevant University policies as appropriate.

6.2

Members of the University Community using generative AI technologies to provide assistance
with producing academic publications and applications for grants have the responsibility to
ensure that their use does not constitute “misconduct in research” as defined under clause 3.7.1
of the Staff Conduct Policy and aligns with specific requirements their publishers or granting
agencies may have.

6.3

Members of the University Community must not use generative AI technologies in assessing or
reviewing material from an external party, unless explicitly permitted by that external party.
Note: This includes reviewing papers, grant applications, and providing assessments of promotion
applications.

6.4

The use of generative AI technologies should not serve as a substitute for the expert judgment
and critical evaluation of material from an external party by reviewers.

6.5

Members of the University Community intending to use generative AI technologies (including
those developed internally at the University) in Human Research must obtain approval from the
Human Ethics Committee (HEC) in the regular way before any formal research procedures
commence. Examples where prior HEC approval is required include, but are not limited to, the
intended use of generative AI technologies in experiments on human subjects or in studies of
humans using generative AI technologies.
Note: More information on Human Research requirements can be found in the Human Ethics Policy and
Human Ethics Guidelines.

6.6

Approval of any costs associated with accessing generative AI technologies for research purposes
must comply with the Procurement Policy and the Financial Delegated Authority (FDA) limits
set out in the Delegations Statute.

6.7

Doctoral and Master’s by research students must comply with the Doctoral Regulations, Master’s
Thesis Regulations, and Student Academic Integrity Regulation. They must also familiarise
themselves with relevant online resources to learn how to use generative AI technologies without
breaching University policies, acknowledge any use of generative AI technologies appropriate
citation standards and library guidance, follow instructions provided by their supervisors, and
seek clarification where needed.
Note: This also applies to undergraduate and all other students who are involved in research activities.

6.8

As a general rule, the unauthorised use of or consultation with generative AI technologies by
doctoral and master’s by research students to provide assistance with any substantial component
of their research or thesis shall be treated as potential academic misconduct under the Student
Academic Integrity Regulation. This does not preclude doctoral and master’s by research
students studying generative AI from investigating and experimenting with generative AI
technologies for the purposes of their research.

6.9

To maintain confidentiality and data security, examiners must not input any part of a thesis under
examination into a generative AI technology that has not been approved for Safe Use for
assessment purposes by Te Tai Matihiko—Digital Solutions. Members of the University
Community acting as examiners for other universities or research institutions must follow the
requirements set by the other party.

Page 4

Generative Artificial Intelligence Policy

9 July 2025

6.10 The use of generative AI technologies should not serve as a substitute for examiners’ expert
judgment and critical evaluation of theses under examination.
Note: Information on examiner responsibilities can be found in the Doctoral Regulations and Master’s
Thesis Regulations.

7.

Compliance

7.1

Any alleged breach of this Policy, including alleged unauthorised, unethical or fraudulent uses of
generative AI technologies will be handled in accordance with the Staff Conduct Policy or Student
Conduct Statute or as appropriate depending on the specific circumstances.

8.

Definitions
In this Policy, unless the context otherwise requires:
Artificial Intelligence (AI) technologies

refers to advanced computational systems that can
perform tasks typically associated with human
intelligence, such as learning, problem-solving,
language processing, image generation, and
pattern recognition.

Generative AI technologies

are AI models that can generate plausible
humanlike or realistic content in response to
natural language prompts or other inputs, in a wide
variety of semantic domains and tasks. Examples of
generative AI technologies include ChatGPT,
Copilot, Gemini and other similar systems used for
producing text, images, or other content.

Human Research

has the meaning given in the Human Ethics Policy.

Members of the University Community

means staff members, students, independent
contractors, adjunct and visiting staff, visiting
scholars and interns, professors emeriti and any
other persons providing services to the University.

Operations

means activities at the University that are neither
learning and teaching nor research, including but
not limited to management, administration,
professional, and technical support. For the
purposes of this Policy, this also includes activities
carried out by academic staff while they are acting
in management and administrative roles.

Policy Document

has the meaning given in the Policy Framework.

Relevant Teaching Activities

has the meaning given in the Human Ethics Policy.

Safe/Safe Use

refers to the assessment of a generative AI
technology from a privacy and data security
standpoint only. Approval for Safe Use does not
ensure that content generated by a generative AI
technology is free from the risks mentioned in
clause 3.2(i). It is also not a substitute for Human
Ethics approval.

Staff Member

means an employee of the University.

Page 5

Generative Artificial Intelligence Policy

9 July 2025

Student

means any person enrolled in a personal course of
study at the University or a person who is studying
at the University under an exchange agreement
with another institution and includes a resident in
a Hall of Residence.
Related Documents and Information

9.

Related Documents
Copyright Act 1994
Education and Training Act 2020
Privacy Act 2020
Victoria University of Wellington Act 1961
Academic Misconduct Procedure
Acceptable Use of Information Systems Statute
Assessment Handbook
Cyber Security Procedures
Delegations Statute
Doctoral Regulations
Equity, Diversity and Inclusion Framework
Fraud Policy
Human Ethics Guidelines
Human Ethics Policy
Information and Records Management Policy
Intellectual Property Policy
Master’s Thesis Regulations
Meeting the Needs of Students with Impairments Policy
Policy Framework
Procurement Policy
Proof-Reading and Editorial Advice Policy
Privacy Policy
Privacy Breach Procedures
Privacy Impact Assessment Guidelines
Responsible Research Policy
Staff Conduct Policy
Student Academic Integrity Regulation
Student Conduct Statute
Sustainability Policy
Te Tiriti o Waitangi Statute
Library Guides - Referencing and citing

Page 6

Generative Artificial Intelligence Policy
10.

9 July 2025

Document Management and Control
Essential Record
Approver
Approval Date
Effective Date
Next Review Date
Policy Sponsor
Policy Owner

Tumu Whakarae – Vice-Chancellor
17 December 2024
24 February 2025
24 February 2026
Toi Ōhanga – Chief Operating Officer
Tumu Maruānuku – Deputy Vice-Chancellor (Academic)
Tumu Maruārangi – Deputy Vice-Chancellor (Research)
Chief Information Officer

Modification History
Date
9 July 2025
12 May 2025
17 December 2024

Approval Agency
General Counsel
General Counsel
Tumu Whakarae – Vice-Chancellor

Page 7

Details
Editorial corrections
Editorial corrections
New policy
