Oct 24

Policy statement on the use of Generative Artificial intelligence (Gen AI) in education
and assessment
Introductory statement
1.

Generative AI (Gen AI) is a tool or ‘instrument’ which uses algorithms to generate
content. This content comes in a variety of formats including text, image, audio,
arithmetic, code, and video.

2.

The University recognises the power and the potential value of Gen AI as part of a
high-quality educational experience. Used responsibly, it can enhance student
learning. In addition, it is important that students understand both the benefits and
limitations of Gen AI so that they are able to make informed decisions about its use in
their subsequent professional lives.

3.

While endorsing the structured and properly acknowledged use of Gen AI, the
University also recognises that these instruments can be used for dishonest
purposes, such as to generate work which a student claims to be their own and
submits for assessment. Failure to reference the use of Gen AI, including the
submission of work which is not a student’s own, will in all cases be considered a
matter of Academic Misconduct.

Key points
4.

AUB supports the constructive use of Gen AI to support learning, teaching and
assessment.

5.

AUB recognises that Gen AI is very good at summarising a large volume of
information. Some Gen AI tools generate reasonable reading lists (although in
written text, they may produce references and lists of resources that do not exist/are
false).

6.

It can also be used to simplify language and give grammatical feedback – checking
spelling, grammar or sentence structure.

7.

Teachers might use Gen AI to support delivery in a number of ways. For example,
students might be asked to generate content and to offer a critique; or they might be
introduced to Gen AI as a general discussion of different learning tools and their
appropriate use / where use becomes dishonest, as opposed to helpful assistance.
Staff and students together may consider a range of different tools and instruments,
and discuss the point at which their use would be dishonest.

8.

While Gen AI tools can generate content in a variety of formats, any information
produced cannot be treated as reliable or accurate. It may simply be wrong; but even
an accurate response may be missing important factors, and it may not address
specific cultural or social contexts. AI will usually offer an ‘average’ response from its
available dataset, which will ignore diversity or unorthodox standpoints unless
prompted appropriately.

Oct 24

9.

Some tools might create a framework for an essay; or generate some initial ideas for
a project, in a variety of formats. There are circumstances in which this might offer a
helpful starting point for students, but it may not always be appropriate.

10.

It is for course teams – not individual staff members – to agree the type and level of
use which is acceptable at different stages of the course. For example, the team
may agree a particular strategy of using Gen AI on one unit, to generate content for
discussion; but also agree that on a concurrent unit, the use of Gen AI would be
inappropriate. These decisions must be conveyed explicitly to students, and
confirmation of acceptable use should be included within assignment briefs.

11.

Information / digital literacy is a vital skill which will be introduced at Level 4 and will
form an integral part of all courses. Students must be clear that responsibility for
content ultimately rests solely with themselves. The use of any tools – from the
Library, Wikipedia, Google or Gen AI – relies on an informed and intelligent curator.
The principle is the same, even though this technology is new and may feel
unfamiliar.

12.

Staff will, on all courses, explain what Gen AI is, its benefits and limitations, and the
use which is considered acceptable. This should be an open conversation with
students, underpinned by the notion of academic integrity and professional ethics as
the cornerstone of a graduate. It is important that students take pride in their original
work and achievements: they should be proud to demonstrate academic integrity,
and should recognise the value of avoiding poor practice (rather than solely focused
on the severity of the possible penalties of academic misconduct) 1. Student
guidance has been produced and published to the website.

13.

Students must not claim authorship of any work they did not produce (and must
acknowledge any references). Guidance on how to reference the use of Gen AI has
been produced by the Library.

14.

AUB recognises that there is no fool-proof detection software for Gen AI. Even the
best tools will identify “false positives” (where the tool flags the work as having been
written by artificial intelligence, although in fact it was all a student’s own work).
There are certain indicators that work was not generated by the student, and these
are likely to be evident to a human assessor without the use of detection software. In
all cases, if academic misconduct of any form is suspected, the Academic
Misconduct Policy should be used. To reduce the risk of an assessment being
compromised, staff are encouraged to reflect carefully on the learning outcomes of
the unit, and how these can be assessed. This might include requiring students to
reflect on their learning, or on their role as future professional global citizens.
Alternatively, students could be asked also to reflect on other work they have done,
or on a cohort discussion or activity, which an AI tool would not be able to do.

15.

Specific guidance on assessment was issued in April 2023 and this still applies.

chromeextension://efaidnbmnnnibpcajpcglclefindmkaj/https://webdocs.aub.ac.uk/Academic%20Misconduct%20Polic
y.pdf?_ga=2.130262223.1129452291.1729701351-1476842798.1715246656

1
