30th September 2026

Using AI tools in your studies and assessments

Find out which AI tools you can use at Herts, when AI is allowed in assessments, how to use AI safely, and when you must declare your use of AI.

This information is for current students. University Staff should refer to the general information on HertsHub and the specific guidance on using artificial intelligence in learning, teaching, and assessment.

On this page:

- Our approach on the use of of AI tools

- Which AI tools can I use at Herts?

- Can I use AI in assessments?

- Where can I get support with AI?

Our approach on the use of AI tools

Here at Herts, we want to help you to understand the significance, benefits and challenges of AI for society, employment, and for your own studies. We know that when you graduate you are likely to need to use AI tools, and your future employers will expect you to use them skilfully and responsibly.

While there may be benefits, it is important to remember that inappropriate use of these tools during your studies can limit your learning and development of skills as well as affecting your own confidence in your qualification and ability. Employers still value your originality of thought, critical thinking abilities, and your interpersonal skills.

Find out below which artificial intelligence (AI) tools you can use at Herts and how to use them responsibly in your studies and assessments.

Which AI tools can I use at Herts?

Herts provides access to AI tools that can support your studies.

Microsoft Copilot

Microsoft Copilot is an AI-powered assistant that can generate text and images.

Adobe Express

Adobe Express can help you create graphics, videos and web content, including AI-generated images.

Google Workspace

- Gemini – Google's AI assistant that can help you research topics, generate content, explore ideas and support your learning.

- Gemini Notebook – an AI-powered study and research tool that helps you understand, organise and summarise information from your own study materials.

Use your Herts account

When using these tools for your studies, sign in with your University account.

These tools benefit from institution-level protections when accessed through your Herts account. For your privacy, security and academic integrity, we recommend using University-supported AI tools rather than external alternatives.

Can I use AI in assessments?

The University's position on AI, proofreading, academic integrity and academic misconduct is outlined in the Academic Integrity and Academic Misconduct Policy (UPR AS14 Appendix III).

Your assessments will fall into one of the following three categories. Each assessment brief will state clearly which one of the categories applies. You must always check your assessment brief for the requirements of your module and if you have any doubts as to the extent to which genAI use may be allowed in an assessment, please always speak to the module leader.

Can AI proofread my work?

Restrictions on AI will also apply to proofreading. Tools that are embedded into standard packages e.g. Word, Grammarly, are becoming more sophisticated with some of the tools reliant on artificial intelligence.

Neither a proof-reader nor a proof-reading tool (whether genAI or not) can ever be used to make changes to your work directly; the proof-reader or proof reading tool must only identify potential changes which you must then choose to accept or reject; this will ensure that you remain the author of your work.

For clarity, where a proofreader, proofreading service or genAI tool is used, they/it may only:

- Identify spelling and typographical errors

- Identify poor grammar

- Highlight formatting errors or inconsistencies

- Identify errors in labelling of diagrams, charts or figures

- Identify areas for possible improvement

- Highlight a sentence or paragraph where the meaning is not clear; or draw attention to repeated phrases or omitted words

Do I need to declare AI use?

Yes. If you use AI in an assessment, you must disclose your use in line with the requirements of your assessment brief.

Where can I get support with AI?

If you need help using AI effectively and responsibly in your studies, visit the Herts Academic Skills guidance on AI.

The resources include advice, guidance and support to help you develop confidence in using AI in line with University requirements.

Top of page

Herts Academic Skills
Academic Integrity Policy
