- a]:no-underline [&>a:hover]:underline">
UL Home

-

- a]:no-underline [&>a:hover]:underline">
Office of the Provost and Deputy President

-

- a]:no-underline [&>a:hover]:underline">
Functions and processes

-

- a]:no-underline [&>a:hover]:underline">
The Academic Integrity Unit

-

-

Tips for Students on the use of Gen AI

Tips for Students on the use of Gen AI

We need your consent to load this YouTube content

This content is loaded from YouTube. We need your permission before loading as it may use cookies and similar technologies that UL does not control.

Change cookie preferences

What are the possible uses of Gen AI?

Gen AI can be used in different ways; some may be specific to your discipline. The following table outlines a number of potential uses, although there are many other uses in addition to those outlined here:

Correction

Correct spelling, grammar and punctuation

Translation

Translate passages of text

Citation

Arrange references according to a particular citation style

Improvement

Improve the style and tone of writing

Feedback

Get feedback on some draft material

Unpacking

Unpack an assignment prompt to better understand it

Brainstorming

Brainstorm a topic to gather a range of approaches

Planning

Generate a research plan

Structuring

Devise a structure for a piece of writing based on an abstract, introduction, or general ideas

Revision

Revise a piece of writing

Comparing

Comparing content developed by Gen AI to that developed by a human

Summarising or reframing content

Gen AI may be used to create summaries of information or reframe how information has been communicated.

What Gen AI tools can be used by students?

From a security and data integrity standpoint, if Gen AI is to be used by staff or students, the preferred platform is currently Microsoft Copilot, accessed through UL staff or student accounts. UL maintains a contractual agreement with Microsoft, a distinction not shared with other providers. Additionally, Copilot provides robust data protection and ensures compliance with European data privacy standards. The following link can be used to access Microsoft Copilot: Copilot (microsoft.com). Users must log in using their UL account if they are not already signed in.

How should a student acknowledge the use of Gen AI within their work?

It is recommended that students include acknowledgements section in your assignment outlining clearly how you used Gen AI, describing the instructions or prompts you gave the AI platform, the results generated and how they contributed to your work. Examples of ‘Acknowledgment Templates’ are provided here . Please note these are for guidance only and can be amended as you require for your specific discipline.

Further requirements may be stipulated by a Department, academic programme, or individual teaching staff. These should be made clear within the assignment brief.

It is important that students understand the difference between acknowledging GenAI use in academic work and differentiate it from their practices of academic referencing and citing. The Glucksman Library has added a couple of examples of how to handle GenAI to their Frequently Asked Questions site. This can be found here.

Is there a checklist that I can give to students to help them think about the use of Gen AI when preparing assignments?

We have also created a sample checklist that could be used by students and submitted as part of their assignments. You can edit this checklist for your student groups to ensure that it is relevant and appropriate for your discipline.

Is there guidance available for students on Gen AI?

- The Academic Integrity Unit have developed a clip summarising good practices in relation to Gen AI for students. This has been developed from the NAIN Generative AI Guidelines for Educators 2023.pdf (qqi.ie).

- The AI Essentials: Student Guide to GenAI is a self-study primer to GenAI and is approximately 30-min duration. You can access the lesson by clicking this link. The lesson has been developed by David Moloney and Yvonne Hynes, the Digital Skills Development Team at the Centre for Transformative Learning (CTL), University of Limerick, as part of the LevUL Up Digital Skills Hub (opens in a new tab) on Brightspace.

-

ITD have developed the following guidance for students on the use of MS Copilot: Microsoft Copilot - UL| SSP (topdesk.net)
