Engaging critically with GenAI tools for your work

Supporting you to confidently and responsibly use Generative Artificial Intelligence (GenAI) tools if you use these for your academic work.

Using AI tools

Artificial Intelligence (AI) is developing rapidly and is fast becoming a feature of our day-to-day lives in the websites and software we use.

There is currently much debate about the use of Generative AI Large Language Model (LLM) tools in Higher Education and how these impact on assessments and academic integrity.

AI tools can be useful to support your learning, for example to help inspire ideas and find information quickly. However, if you are thinking about using them to help with an assignment, there are some important things to think about before you do.

The Skills Centre has produced a video guide setting out nine key points and questions to consider helping you use AI tools confidently and responsibly in your work.

Read our blogs on GenAI

Academic Integrity in the Context of GenAI

If you are considering using GenAI tools as part of an assessment, you should check whether this is permitted, in line with the University's Academic Integrity Statement.

Academic integrity is a core principle in the quest for knowledge and education. It requires commitment to ethical standards, including honesty, accountability, and respect for others' work.

The Academic Integrity in the Context of Generative Artificial Intelligence guide will inform you about the importance of academic integrity and the University's policies and guidelines regarding the use of Generative Artificial Intelligence (GenAI), and how to maintain academic integrity when using GenAI tools.

This resource forms part of the training to support you to satisfactorily complete the Academic Integrity Initiative Test.

Academic Integrity Initiative Test

Additional Academic Integrity Information and Support

If you are unsure about using AI tools for your work, please talk to your lecturer or tutor to check their expectations.

You can find extensive guidance on referencing in The Library’s Referencing Guide, including specific content on Academic Integrity, Plagiarism and AI.

Separate guidance for staff on the use of Generative AI at the University is available on the Learning & Teaching Hub @Bath.

Develop your GenAI skills

Grasping the ethical and effective use of technologies like GenAI, especially in a university setting, is not only a valuable skill but one that will significantly benefit your post-graduate professional journey.

We have developed two main resources to support you in introducing you to GenAI and developing your skills and competencies in using GenAI. Firstly, Introduction to Microsoft Copilot introduces you to Microsoft Copilot, what it can do and strategies for using it effectively and ethically. Secondly, the Generative Artificial Intelligence (GenAI) Module is designed to equip you with essential GenAI skills tailored for academic contexts, while also fostering a deep understanding of AI literacy and the crucial role of critical thinking in this rapidly changing domain.

Generative Artificial Intelligence (GenAI) Module
