Generative Artificial Intelligence – a quick student guide for
assessment integrity
1. Introduction
1.1. This guidance is a supporting document to both the Academic Integrity and
Misconduct Policy and the Supporting Good Academic Practice Policy. It should
be understood in conjunction with these, not in isolation.
1.2. Please refer to the Academic Integrity and Misconduct Policy for information on:
1.2.1. Academic misconduct stages
1.2.2. Academic misconduct process
1.3. Please refer to the Supporting Good Academic Practice Policy for information on:
1.3.1. Examples of good academic practice
1.3.2. Examples of poor academic practice

2. Guidance on when to use AI
2.1. Birkbeck recognises that AI tools including generative AI can support and assist
the learning and development process in constructive ways. There may be
legitimate uses for AI, especially in the preparatory stages of your work, for
example, in helping you summarise and analyse complex materials, extract key
findings, break writer’s block and highlight grammatical errors.
2.2. Indiscriminate or inappropriate use of AI tools including generative AI does not
support good learning. You are here to develop your own knowledge and critical
thinking skills. At worst, use of AI tools including generative AI to plagiarise or
cheat undermines confidence in our qualifications and the integrity of your
degree.

3. AI and Academic Integrity and Misconduct
3.1. It is your responsibility to maintain your own academic integrity whilst using AI
tools including generative AI. By using AI tools responsibly, you can maintain the
principles of academic integrity set out in the Academic Integrity and Misconduct
Policy and the Supporting Good Academic Practice Policy to ensure you avoid
potential disciplinary action.

3.2. You should only use AI tools, including generative AI, to the extent that has been
outlined in the assessment brief. Some assessments will permit the use of AI
tools for some aspects of your work, while others will not permit any use of AI
tools at all. You should pay close attention to the assessment brief as this will
state what level and type of AI usage is permitted for that particular assessment.
It will also specify if there are any specific AI tools you should use.
3.3. If the use of AI tools including generative AI is explicitly not permitted, then you
should not use AI tools when completing your work. You should only use AI tools
to the extent that they have been clearly permitted.
3.4. If the assessment brief does not explicitly mention the use of AI tools including
generative AI, you should adhere to the Supporting Good Academic Practice
Policy.
3.5. If you are unclear or have queries about whether the use of any AI tools
including generative AI may or may not be permitted for a particular assessment,
please contact the Module Convenor in the first instance.
3.6. Where the use of AI tools including generative AI is permitted you must:
3.6.1. Reference the use in your work (see section 4 below)
3.6.2. Briefly outline your AI use in the AI Declaration (see section 5 below)
3.6.3. Keep a record of the tools, prompts and outputs (see section 6 below).

4. Referencing the use of AI tools in your work
4.1. It is expected that references to AI outputs will include: (i) the name of the AI
platform, (ii) the date of use, (iii) the person who input the prompt.
4.2. Advice on how to cite private correspondence within the various referencing
styles is available from the Library. eg for Harvard referencing the in-text citation
might look like this (OpenAI ChatGPT, 2024) and the corresponding reference
might look like this:
OpenAI ChatGPT (2024). ChatGPT response to YOUR NAME, 1 January 2024.
4.3. For other forms of AI use It is recommended that you use the ‘database’ format,
with the addition of information about the specifics of the use. For example:

OpenAI (2024). ChatGPT. Version X. [Online]. Available at: URL [Accessed 9 April
2024]. To translate poem Xyzzarg (out of copyright) into English.

5. The AI Declaration
5.1. The AI Declaration is intended to support students in ensuring their use of AI
tools including generative AI meets the permitted use outlined in the
Assessment Brief, and to support staff in understanding how students are using
AI tools. It is an important tool in ensuring the integrity not only of the work you
submit but of all qualifications awarded by Birkbeck, for which the whole
Birkbeck community is responsible; both staff and students. An offline copy of
the AI Declaration is included in Appendix 1 for reference; please do not use this
version when submitting your work.
5.2. The AI Declaration must be submitted with all assessments submitted to, or
completed on, Moodle, including those where no AI use is permitted by the
Assessment Brief.
5.3. In-person assessments such as exams, in-class tests and purely practical
assessments do not require an AI Declaration to be submitted. Some observed
remote assessments may not require you to submit one either. The module
convenor will clearly communicate where an AI Declaration must be submitted.
5.4. You should complete and submit the form on Moodle, following the instructions
given online. You are encouraged to complete the form and submit your AI
Declaration immediately after submitting your assignment, but you will have up
to 24 hours after the submission to complete and submit the AI Declaration. You
will also have the option to edit or update your declaration after submitting if
you have made any errors or left out any relevant information about your use of
AI tools.
5.5. The College’s Late Submission of Work for Assessment Policy will apply to all
assessments.
5.6. Staff will review the AI Declaration when marking work to ensure you have
complied with the permitted use of AI tools including generative AI. Failure to
submit a completed Declaration with your work may be taken into account
during an investigation if your work is subsequently flagged for possible
academic misconduct (see section 7).

5.7. If you have queries on completing the AI Declaration, please contact your
Module Convenor or Learning Development Tutor.

6. Retaining evidence of AI use
6.1. You should retain evidence of your use of AI tools including generative AI. This
could be in the form of transcripts or screenshots of prompts and outputs.
6.2. You do not have to submit evidence of prompts and outputs with the AI
Declaration, however if your work is flagged for possible academic misconduct,
you may be asked to provide evidence to show that your use was in line with the
permitted parameters of the Assessment Brief. Not being able to provide this
may at best be seen as poor academic practice and at worst may be taken as a
lack of evidence that your work followed good academic practice and therefore
could be investigated for academic misconduct (see section 7).

7. Suspected AI misconduct
7.1. The College is committed to upholding academic integrity and this includes the
ethical use of AI tools including generative AI. If a summative assessment is
suspected of academic misconduct, through the inappropriate use of AI tools, it
will be progressed in accordance with the College’s Academic Integrity and
Misconduct Policy.
7.2. Academic staff use the Turnitin originality (AI) checker which flags AI use in an
assessment. They then check this against the permitted use outlined in the
assessment brief as well as your statement in the AI Declaration. If the flag does
not match the permitted use they may then refer your work to the Academic
Integrity and Misconduct process. All referrals are considered in line with the
Academic Integrity and Misconduct Policy.
7.3. We encourage an open environment in which students can ask questions about
specific use and permissibility of AI tools including generative AI, discuss the
potential benefits and associated risks and challenges and then take
responsibility for the choices you make in completing your assessments.

8. Useful resources

8.1. College policies, guidance and frameworks:
8.1.1. Academic Integrity and Misconduct Policy
8.1.2. Supporting Good Academic Practice guidance
8.2. College advice and support services:
8.2.1. Student Learning Development
8.2.2. Birkbeck, University of London Students’ Union guidance on AI use
8.3. Other agencies and universities:
8.3.1. Quality Assurance Agency’s pages on academic integrity and on artificial
intelligence
8.3.2. Turnitin guide for approaching artificial intelligence generated text in the
classroom
8.3.3. King’s College London guidance on artificial intelligence usage. This has
some useful guidance at a general, a programme/module and an assessment
level
8.3.4. The University of Melbourne tips for navigating artificial intelligence

Policy Review
Created:
Latest update:
Date of next review:
Owner:
SLT owner:
Committee oversight:

January 2023
April 2026
2026-27 academic year
Student Complaints, Conduct and Appeals Manager
DVC Education and Student Experience
Education and Student Experience Committee for Academic
Board

Appendix 1: Copy of the AI Declaration
Below is an offline copy of the AI Declaration form, presented for information only. Staff
and students should not use this copy, and must make use of the Moodle version of the
AI Declaration.
______________________________________________________________________________________________
Guidance:
Students must complete this form for all assessments. The purpose of this form is to
declare the level of your use of AI tools including generative AI – did you use it, what
purposes did you use it for, and how did you work with it?
Key requirements:
•

Review your assessment brief. This will include information on whether AI tools
including generative AI are permitted or required for aspects of the assessment,
how they should be used, and any restrictions on specific tools you can or cannot
use.

•

Track your AI use as you work. As with referencing, you should collate the
information as you progress through your assignment, so that you have it all
ready for when you submit your finished work.

•

Complete the form for all assessments. This applies regardless of whether or not
the assessment brief permits or requires the use of any AI tools including
generative AI and whether or not you have used AI tools including generative AI.
Make sure to plan ahead and allow time to complete the form before the
submission deadline.

•

Keep evidence of your use of AI tools including generative AI. This could be in the
form of screenshots or transcripts. It may be needed later as part of an Academic
Integrity and Misconduct investigation.

Important Notes:
•

You must ensure you have complied with any restrictions stated in your
assessment brief.

•

You must still ensure you reference any use of AI tools including generative AI in
your work. If you complete this declaration and have not properly referenced AI in
your work it will still be flagged for academic integrity.

Submission Process:
1. Read the instructions in the form carefully.
2. Complete all applicable sections of the form.

3. Click ‘Submit’ at the bottom of the page.
If you have questions about completing this form, please contact your Module Convenor
or Learning Development Tutor.
Section 1: Declare
You must choose 'Yes' under one of the following statements (S1Q1 or S1Q2):
1) AI tools NOT used (This statement corresponds to the S1Q1 Declaration):
“I declare that I have not used any AI tools including generative AI in preparing this
assessment.”
S1Q1 Declaration – please click ‘Yes’ if the statement above is true for this assessment
(i.e. you have NOT used AI); otherwise click ‘No’ and move to the next statement.
[Choice of Yes or No]
If you choose ‘Yes’ for the S1Q1 Declaration you do not need to complete the rest of the
form, but you must still click ‘Submit’ at the bottom of the page.
2) AI tools used (This statement corresponds to the S1Q2 Declaration):
“I declare that I have used AI tools including generative AI in line with the assessment
brief for this specific assessment and with Birkbeck’s Academic Integrity and Misconduct
Policy and guidance on AI. I have summarised the process I used to maintain
transparency and academic integrity and I take full responsibility for the content
submitted. I have retained evidence of my use of AI tools including generative AI for
reference.”
S1Q2 Declaration – please click ‘Yes’ if the statement above is true for this assessment
(i.e. you HAVE used AI in line with the assessment brief and Birkbeck’s policies and
guidance); otherwise click ‘No’.
[Choice of Yes or No]
If you choose ‘Yes’ for the S1Q2 Declaration you need to complete Section 2 of this form
before clicking ’Submit’ at the bottom of the page.
Section 2: Describe
•

If you chose ‘Yes’ for the S1Q1 Declaration above, declaring that you have not
used AI tools including generative AI, you do not need to complete this section of
the form. Please go directly to the bottom of this page and click ‘Submit’.

•

If you chose ‘Yes’ for the S1Q2 Declaration above, declaring that you have used
AI tools including generative AI, please complete this section of the form.

Provide a summary (up to 250 words) of how you used AI tools including generative AI
in your work, in line with the assessment brief. You should cover the following
information:
1. Which AI tool(s) you used.
2. A brief description of the prompts you used and the outputs that were generated.
3. How you used any material generated by AI tools including generative AI.
4. Which parts of the work were contributed by AI tools including generative AI, and
which parts were contributed by you.
[A large text box where students can type out how they used AI]
