Lincoln Bishop University
Document Administration
Document Title:

Code of Practice for Academic Misconduct

Document Category:

Code of Practice

Version Number:

4.4

Status:

APPROVED

Reason for
Development:

To set out clearly the roles and responsibilities surrounding
Academic Misconduct at Lincoln Bishop University and to
ensure compliance.

Scope:

This Code applies to students

Author/Developer:

Quality Office

Owner:

Executive Dean: Teaching, Learning & Student Success

Assessment:
(where relevant)

Assessment Type:

Assessment Status:

Equality Assessment

COMPLETE

Legal

NOT REQUIRED

Information Governance

NOT REQUIRED

Academic Governance

NOT REQUIRED

Consultation Type:

Consultation Status:

Staff Trade Unions via HR

NOT REQUIRED

Students via Students’ Union

COMPLETE

Any External Statutory Bodies

NOT REQUIRED

Consultation:
(where relevant)

Authorising Board:

Senate

Date First Authorised:

July 2018

Reviewed & Effective
From:

11 March 2026

Next Review Due*:

August 2026 – unless required earlier

Document Location:

University Website

Document Control:

All printed versions of this document are classified as
uncontrolled. A controlled version is available from the
University Website.

Alternative Format:

If you require this document in an alternative format, please
contact policy@lincolnbishop.ac.uk

*Please Note: This document remains valid until formally revoked or replaced by the University.

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR
ACADEMIC MISCONDUCT
VERSION CONTROL TABLE
Version
Number

Date Authorised

Summary of Key Changes

3.0

23 July 2018

Additional information including types of
misconduct and inclusion of the table of
penalties

4.0

22 July 2019

Amended to take into account feedback
received through the student complaint
system and to align to the panel
composition and conduct within the
Student Disciplinary Policy

4.1

17 March 2021

Amended to take into account the QAA
contracting to cheat guidance and to
update terminology

4.2

18 October 2023

Amended to take account of the
recommendations from the Academic
Integrity Group which was approved by
QAC in June 2023

4.3

10 July 2024

Amended to take account of revised
structure and processes

11 March 2026

University logo and name change.
‘Plagiarism through AI’ allocated separate
sub-heading as per OIAHE guidance

4.4

Executive Dean: Teaching, Learning
& Student Success

Page 2

V4.4_March 2026

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR
ACADEMIC MISCONDUCT
1. INTRODUCTION
1.1. The Code of Practice for Academic Misconduct provides definitions for the
identification of inappropriate academic practice, known as academic
misconduct, the severity of such misconduct and a sequence of actions for
the investigation of alleged misconduct, determination of whether
misconduct has occurred and guidelines for the application of outcomes in
confirmed cases.
2. DEFINITIONS OF ACADEMIC MISCONDUCT
2.1. Academic misconduct is where the balance of probability indicates any
intentional, unintentional or reckless conduct by a student, or students,
which results in gaining an unfair advantage or benefit, or causes an unfair
disadvantage or loss to another student, or students, in pursuit of an
academic qualification at the University. Misconduct occurs regardless of
the success of these actions.
2.2. The context for academic misconduct includes any summative assessment
taken by a student in pursuit of an academic qualification at the University.
2.3. Characteristics of Academic Misconduct include:
2.3.1. Personation
Personation is the assumption of the identity of another person with
intent to deceive or gain an unfair advantage.
2.3.2. Falsification
Falsification is an attempt to present fictitious or distorted data,
evidence, references, citations, or experimental results, and/or to
knowingly make use of such material.
2.3.3. Soliciting or commissioning work
Soliciting or commissioning work (including what is often known as
contract cheating) is the seeking to gain unfair advantage by
incorporating material in work submitted for assessment that has been
commissioned, purchased or obtained from a third party (e.g. essay
mills or other students).
2.3.4. Cheating
Cheating is any attempt to obtain or give assistance in an examination
or an assessment without due acknowledgement (including the use of
cheat sheets).
Executive Dean: Teaching, Learning
& Student Success

Page 3

V4.4_March 2026

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR
ACADEMIC MISCONDUCT
2.3.5. Breaches of research ethics and health and safety policies
Breaches of our research and ethics and/or health and safety policies
may include:
i.

carrying out research without the appropriate ethical approval/
permissions; and conducting research in a manner, whether on or off
campus, which represents a potential or actual threat to the safety,
security, health, wellbeing, good order, or reputation of the
University, its members, an external organisation or placement
provider, or members of the public.

2.3.6. Collusion
Collusion occurs where a student submits, with the intent of gaining
unfair advantage, work which has been done in collaboration with
another person as entirely their own. It includes aiding and abetting
another person to cheat by way of collusion.
2.3.7. Plagiarism
Plagiarism is the act of copying or including in one’s own work, without
adequate acknowledgement, intentionally or unintentionally, the work of
another, with our without the creator’s permission. Assignments
presented as collaborative group assessments, which include the work
of other that has not been acknowledged are also plagiarised.
2.3.8. Plagiarism through AI
Drawing down text in whole or part from Artificial Intelligence (AI) that is
more substantial than grammar, spelling and punctuation checks of
your original work is not permitted unless specified within the
assignment brief. Submitting AI created work as your own may also
count as academic misconduct and will be investigated under the Code
of Practice for Academic Misconduct.
2.3.9. Self-plagiarism
Self-plagiarism is the act of copying or including in one’s own work,
without adequate acknowledgement, intentionally or unintentionally,
work which the student has submitted previously for assessment at
Lincoln Bishop University or another university, in whole or in part. This
includes formative work submitted for feedback, for example, work
submitted during the development phases of a dissertation.

Executive Dean: Teaching, Learning
& Student Success

Page 4

V4.4_March 2026

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR
ACADEMIC MISCONDUCT
3. CATEGORIES OF ACADEMIC MISCONDUCT
3.1. Following completion of Stage 1 and 2, (see relevant section of this Code),
where a student is considered to have attempted to gain an unfair
advantage in the completion of an assessment, an investigation will be
undertaken and an outcome will be imposed. The possible outcomes of any
investigations according to the level of misconduct committed:
3.1.1. minor academic misconduct
3.1.2. major academic misconduct
3.1.3. gross academic misconduct
3.2. Minor Academic Misconduct
3.2.1. the misconduct involves a minor amount of assessed work; and/or
3.2.2. the misconduct arose primarily from poorly applied citation conventions
and/or a minor amount of unattributed materials; and/or
3.2.3. there is no indication to suggest that the student intended to gain an
unfair advantage.
3.2.4. If there is clear indication that the student intended to gain an unfair
advantage, the conduct should be considered as either Major or Gross
academic misconduct.
3.3. Major Academic Misconduct
3.3.1. the misconduct involves a major amount of assessed work; and/or
3.3.2. the misconduct resulted primarily from the inclusion of unattributed
work, rather simply poor scholarship (e.g. lack of citation); and/or
3.3.3. there is evidence that clear guidance on academic conventions has
been provided; and/or
3.3.4. there is a record of the student previously committing an instance of
minor academic misconduct.
3.4. Gross Academic Misconduct
3.4.1. the misconduct involves the majority of the assessed work; and/or
3.4.2. there is a record of the student having previously committed major
academic misconduct.

Executive Dean: Teaching, Learning
& Student Success

Page 5

V4.4_March 2026

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR
ACADEMIC MISCONDUCT
4. OUTCOMES
4.1. The Adjudicating Panel may impose one of the following outcomes:
Table 1 – Adjudicating Panel Outcomes (Undergraduate/Postgraduate)
Potential:
Poor
academic
practice
Minor
Misconduct
Major
Misconduct

Gross
Misconduct

Single Incidents
Repeat Offences
Not misconduct but will result in not meeting assessment
criteria and so lower grades.
Minor level
academic
misconduct
Major level
academic
misconduct up to
50% of the
assessment
Gross level of
academic
misconduct 50+%

Single event case
Collusion
Fictitious
Information/ data

2nd minor = major
Minor+major = major

Personation
Commissioning
Cheating in
examination/
practical
assessment

3rd minor = gross, or,
major+minor = gross,
or
major+major = gross

Notes:
1.

This table acts as a guide and each case must be considered on its
own merits. There will be occasions when particular factors mean that
a case falls within either a higher or lower category than indicated in
this guide to provide greater consideration and ensure that a fair
outcome can be reached. The level of consideration and finding of
academic misconduct is ultimately a matter of academic judgement.

2.

Where misconduct is investigated in multiple assignments that were
submitted at the same time, this will be considered to be a single
occurrence.

5. STUDENTS ON RESEARCH DEGREES
5.1. Lincoln Bishop University expects all research students to adhere to the
principles of good practice in research. Misconduct in research is a
failure to comply with the provisions of the University’s Code of Conduct
for Doctoral Research.

Executive Dean: Teaching, Learning
& Student Success

Page 6

V4.4_March 2026

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR
ACADEMIC MISCONDUCT
6. PROCEDURE FOR THE INVESTIGATION AND DETERMINATION OF
ALLEGATIONS OF ACADEMIC MISCONDUCT
Preliminary Investigation – Stage One
6.1. The module tutor or marker(s) will inform the appropriate Programme
Leader and Deputy Dean of a suspected case of misconduct. Advice
and support may be sought by the Academic Integrity Group.
6.2. The Programme Leader, together with the tutor concerned, will write to
the student at least one day prior to the day on which marks are due to
be released, explaining the nature of the allegation and requiring them
to attend a preliminary investigation meeting. (In cases where the
Programme Leader is the module tutor or marker, another member of
the programme team will attend the meeting alongside the Programme
Leader). Staff should consider the timing of this communication to
ensure that students receive it when support is available on campus.
The Programme Leader will explain the nature of the potential
misconduct, present the evidence to the student and invite them to
comment. At the meeting, the programme team will ensure that
students understand any allegations against them, that they have the
opportunity to present their case and to respond. Notes of the meeting
will be taken. At the conclusion of the meeting, the Programme Leader
and module tutor or marker will review the evidence to determine
whether a case has been established. In cases involving more than one
student, it shall be for the Programme Leader to decide whether they
should be interviewed together or separately. The University reserves
the right to use oral verification as a method of determining likelihood of
academic misconduct.
6.3. Students will be directed to the support services available (including
Students’ Union for independent support and advice).
6.4. If the staff attending the meeting decide that the student has provided a
satisfactory explanation of the circumstances and that there is no case
to answer, they will advise the Deputy Dean and the Faculty
Administration Manager. If the case has been dismissed due to lack of
development work with the student to understand academic
misconduct, the subsequent training will be recorded on the Student
Record System.

Executive Dean: Teaching, Learning
& Student Success

Page 7

V4.4_March 2026

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR
ACADEMIC MISCONDUCT
6.5. If the members of staff attending the meeting determine that a minor
case of academic misconduct has been established, they will consider
whether there are grounds for believing that it has been committed
inadvertently. (Careful thought should be given to the case of first-year
students since the early period of a student's registration should be
regarded as developmental for the purpose of instilling good academic
practices). In those cases where it is decided that the alleged offence is
inadvertent, the Programme Leader will advise the Deputy Dean and
the Faculty Administration Manager. The Deputy Dean will write to the
student confirming the conclusion of the investigation and the outcomes
available to be imposed. The indicative level of outcome available is
outlined in Table 1. The student is required to attend a session with a
member of academic staff (e.g. their personal tutor) to discuss how they
can avoid academic misconduct in the future. The letter should make it
clear that any future case of alleged academic misconduct by the
student will be deemed deliberate and therefore would be automatically
considered under the processes for major/gross academic misconduct.
6.6. Where it is suspected that a case of major or gross academic
misconduct may have occurred, the Programme Leader will advise the
Deputy Dean accordingly and this will trigger Stage 2.
Process for Academic Misconduct – Stage Two
6.7. Where cases of major or gross academic misconduct are suspected the
process outlined below will be followed.
6.8. The Deputy Dean will inform the student in writing of the outcome
indicating that the matter will now be the subject of a formal
investigation. It is important to make clear that, at this stage, the
allegations have not yet been substantiated. The Deputy Dean will write
to the Faculty Administration Manager enclosing copies of any evidence
relating to the case, including notes of the meeting with the student.
6.9. The Faculty Administration Manager will:
6.9.1. Inform the student of the allegation in writing and invite the student to
respond in writing within 10 working days, admitting or denying the
allegation. This period may be shorter than 10 working days where
there are time constraints, for example due to vacation periods or
scheduled meetings of the Board of Examiners. The correspondence
will outline the nature of the potential misconduct under investigation.
Executive Dean: Teaching, Learning
& Student Success

Page 8

V4.4_March 2026

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR
ACADEMIC MISCONDUCT
6.9.2. Arrange for an Academic Misconduct Panel to be established
consisting of three members of academic staff unconnected with the
student's programme, one of whom shall be a Deputy Dean or their
nominee, who shall act as Chair. A representative from the
programme concerned (nominated by the Deputy Dean) will be
invited to present the case from the Faculty perspective.
6.9.3. Advise the student that they have the right to be heard in person and
be accompanied at the Panel meeting by a friend, a member of staff,
a student of the University, or a member of the Students’ Union. The
student may ask for deferment of the meeting as a result of
extenuating circumstances (supported by appropriate evidence). The
Panel shall proceed with or without the attendance of the student
concerned, unless the student has established a claim for
extenuating circumstances which warrants a deferment of the
meeting.
6.9.4. Arrange for the relevant information to be made available to the
Panel, including:
i.
ii.

iii.

a copy of the Code of Practice;
evidence of potential misconduct supplied by the Faculty, together
with a record detailing the preliminary investigation stage and
decisions taken; and
student response to the allegation, including any supporting
evidence.

Procedures for Academic Misconduct Panel – Stage Two
6.10. Procedures for the Academic Misconduct Panel are as follows:
6.10.1.

The Panel will consider the evidence provided and the case
presented by the programme team concerned.
6.10.2. The Chair of the Panel will explain the purpose of the meeting,
ensure that the student understands the allegation and that the
student will have the opportunity to present their case and to
respond to panel questions.
6.10.3. Members of the Panel will ask questions of the student about their
submission, for example, asking how the student composed their
work/crafted their assignment.
6.10.4. The Panel has the power to adjourn the hearing to another date and
to summon additional witnesses/request additional evidence if it
thinks it would be appropriate to do so in order to pursue its
investigation.
6.10.5. The Panel will make a judgement when it is satisfied that it has
examined sufficient evidence.
Executive Dean: Teaching, Learning
& Student Success
Page 9
V4.4_March 2026

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR
ACADEMIC MISCONDUCT
6.10.6.
6.10.7.

The Panel will make its judgement in private on whether the
allegation of misconduct is proven or not.
The audio recording of meetings or hearings under this procedure is
permitted for the purposes of minute taking only. Any audio recording
made will be deleted once the accuracy of the minutes has been
agreed.

6.11. Where more than one student is accused of the same offence, it will be
for the Chair of the Panel to determine whether they should be
interviewed separately or together.
6.12. The Panel will be required to exercise judgment in each case on the
severity of the outcome, taking into consideration the circumstances of
the misconduct, the number of students involved, any record of
previous misconduct, the level of the programme on which the student
is registered and any mitigating factors presented by the student/in
support of the student. Panel members should be aware of the
consequences of any outcome on the student's progression on the
programme, which may include funding.
6.13. If the members of the Panel cannot agree, the verdict of the Panel will be
that of the majority of its members.
6.14. Any outcomes imposed that have a consequence on the student’s
progression or award will be referred to the Board of Examiners for
approval of the relevant sanctions. If termination is considered to be
appropriate, the Panel will be required to recommend the decision to the
Board of Examiners. A record of the decision of any Panel and penalties
imposed will be retained on the student’s record.
6.15. The Faculty Administration Manager will communicate the overall
decision in writing, via email, to the student and the Deputy Dean within
2 working days. The decision will also be recorded on the student’s
record.
6.16. The student concerned will be notified of the decision of the panel by
letter, sent to the student’s university email address recorded on the
Student Record System (SRS).

Executive Dean: Teaching, Learning
& Student Success

Page 10

V4.4_March 2026

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR
ACADEMIC MISCONDUCT
6.17. In cases where the termination of study is imposed on a student who
is registered for a programme with professional or statutory body
recognition e.g. QTS, JNC, BPS, the University should inform that body
of the outcome of the case.
7. APPEALS
7.1. Students may appeal against any decision made under this Policy; the
appeal must be received by the Faculty Administration Team within 20
working days of the notification of the result to the student.
7.2. A student may appeal a decision on the following grounds:
7.2.1. there was a procedural irregularity in the application of the
academic misconduct procedures;
7.2.2. new evidence is now available which was not available upon
reasonable enquiry or application at the time of the original meeting;
and/ or
7.2.3. the decision reached was of such nature that it was one which no
reasonable person could have reached on the available evidence.
7.3. Upon receipt of the appeal the relevant Dean of Faculty will consider
whether the request for the appeal falls within scope of the grounds
listed above. The Dean of Faculty will normally respond to the student
within 10 working days, to confirm receipt and inform the student
whether the University will conduct a review. Where the appeal is made
against a decision taken by the Board of Examiners, the procedure
outlined in the University’s Code of Practice for Academic Appeals will
be followed.
7.4. If the Dean of Faculty does not consider the appeal to be in scope, then
the response will also include a Completion of Procedures letter and the
student will be informed of their right to contact the Office of the
independent Adjudicator (OIA) should they remain dissatisfied, including
the grounds on which they may do so.
7.5. If the Dean of Faculty considers the appeal to be in scope, then the
Dean of Faculty will choose from the following courses of action:
7.5.1. conducting a review of the case;
7.5.2. requesting that a senior academic member of staff with no prior
involvement of the case conducts the review; and
Executive Dean: Teaching, Learning
& Student Success

Page 11

V4.4_March 2026

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR
ACADEMIC MISCONDUCT
7.6. in exceptional circumstances, convene a new panel to consider the case
afresh. The Dean of Faculty will take special attention to identifying
appeals which may require particularly swift action, these may include
but are not limited to:
7.6.1. cases where the impact of the issues raised may have detrimental
consequences for the student’s mental health or wellbeing; and
7.6.2. cases where time limits apply, for example in meeting regulatory
requirements for the completion of professional courses.
7.7. It is not usually necessary to convene a new panel to consider the case
afresh, however this course of action is available. In such cases the
procedures outlined under the paragraphs above will be followed. The
Panel will be chaired by the Dean of Faculty.
7.8. Following the completion of the review, the Dean of Faculty will write to
the student, informing them of the outcome within 2 working days.
7.9. The outcome of the review stage represents the final stage of the
University’s internal procedures. The student will be issued with a
Completion of Procedures letter by the Faculty Administration Team
within 10 working days of the conclusion of the Review. If the student
remains dissatisfied, they are able to pursue the matter through the
procedures of the OIA. Details may be found on the OIA website
http://www.oiahe.org.uk or from:
OIA
PO Box 3362
Reading
RG1 9UF
8. COLLABORATIVE PROVISION
8.1. This Code covers students of Lincoln Bishop University at franchised
partner institutions. Non-franchised partner institutions are expected to
have a procedure for academic misconduct that is equivalent to that of the
University.

Executive Dean: Teaching, Learning
& Student Success

Page 12

V4.4_March 2026
