Directorate of Student Experience and
Teaching Excellence

Policy: Academic Integrity

RSA

Academic Integrity

Version Control
Policy Name:

Academic Integrity

Owner:

Tori McKay, Associate Director (Academic Experience)

Author:
Approved by:

Tori McKay, Associate Director (Academic Experience)
Cathie Raw, Head of Student Circumstances & Casework
Senate

Date of Approval of this Version:

15.10.2025

Next Review Date:

June 2027

Version Number:

1.1

Applicable Statutory, Legal or
National Best Practice
Requirements:

OIA – Good Practice Framework: Disciplinary Procedures
(Oct 2018)
OIA – Good Practice Framework: Handling Complaints and
Appeals (Dec 2022)
OIA – Good Practice Framework: Bias and the Perception of
Bias (Dec 2022)
The Equality Act (2010)
UK Higher Education Providers – Advice on Consumer
Protection Law (May 2023)

Equality Impact Assessment
Completion Date:

03.11.2025

Data Protection Impact Assessment 28.05.2024
Completion Date:

This document can only be considered valid when viewed via the University website
and/or intranet. If this document is printed into hard copy or saved to another
location, you must check that the version number on your copy matches that of the
one on the University website. Approved documents are valid for use after their
approval date and remain in force beyond any expiry of their review date until a
new version is available.
Any supporting documents listed in this policy can be found on the Student Casework
Academic Misconduct site.

RSA

Academic Integrity

Contents
1.

Introduction and Aims ................................................................................... 1

2.

Purpose and Scope ....................................................................................... 1

3.

Academic Integrity and Good Academic Practice ................................................... 1

4.

Poor Academic Practice versus Academic Misconduct .............................................. 2

5.

Concerns about Academic Practice/Integrity ........................................................ 3

6.

Academic Concern Meetings ............................................................................ 3

7.

Academic Integrity Investigations ...................................................................... 4

8.

Outcomes for Academic Misconduct Cases ........................................................... 8

9.

Appealing a Misconduct Outcome and/or Penalty................................................... 8

10. Consideration of Extenuating/Personal Circumstances ............................................. 9
11. Roles and Responsibilities ............................................................................. 10
12. Accessibility and Inclusivity ........................................................................... 11
13. Oversight, Implementation and Support ............................................................ 11

RSA

Academic Integrity

1. Introduction and Aims
1.1

The University of Bradford is committed to upholding the highest standards of academic
quality and integrity. Academic integrity involves both individual responsibility and
collective commitment and is essential, not only for maintaining the credibility of our
awards and programmes of study, but also for ensuring fairness, respect, and trust within
our academic community.

1.2

While it is accepted that a key part of a student’s academic journey at the University will
involve the development and refinement of their academic practice, all students are
expected to take responsibility for their own learning and agree to adhere to the
fundamental expectations regarding academic integrity and good academic practice.

1.3

This policy aims to outline the University’s expectations with regards to good academic
practice and provides a robust, yet supportive, framework for considering academic
integrity concerns. The policy aims to ensure that all such concerns are investigated fairly,
consistently and in a timely manner, and that all parties are clear on their roles and
responsibilities regarding the process.

2. Purpose and Scope
2.1

This policy applies to all students participating in taught programmes and/or modules at
the University of Bradford, regardless of qualification level or subject discipline.

2.2

The basic principle of this policy is that if a student attends an examination or submits a
piece of coursework, they are confirming that they intend to participate in the
assessment process and that they understand and agree to comply with the University’s
expectations in relation to academic integrity.

2.3

The Academic Integrity policy and process is not intended to manage the consideration of
misconduct as it relates to student behaviour outside the parameters of academic
assessment. Such scenarios are considered and managed through the Student Disciplinary
Procedure.

2.4

Issues of academic integrity and ethical practice as they relate to postgraduate research
students and/or members of staff at the University are considered via a separate policy
within Research and Innovation Services.

3. Academic Integrity and Good Academic Practice
3.1

Academic integrity means acting in an honest and ethical way, both in the pursuit of
knowledge (e.g. in learning and research activity) and in the demonstration of knowledge
(e.g. through assessment activity). It describes a set of overarching values and principles
that should guide students in upholding the standards of their own academic work and
those of the University.

3.2

Good academic practice is a term closely related to academic integrity and is a
fundamental expectation when undertaking a programme of study at the University. Good
academic practice involves adhering to institutional policies, complying with assessment
requirements, following ethical guidelines, and demonstrating proficiency in academic
skills, including:


1

RSA

Producing and presenting original work.

Academic Integrity

3.3



Respecting the intellectual property of others, by attributing ideas and/or the
work of others through accurate citations and referencing.



Ensuring accuracy and precision in research methods, data collection, analysis,
and reporting to maintain the integrity of academic research and scholarship.

Students are supported to understand the University’s expectations relating to academic
integrity, as well as to develop good academic practice, through resources such as:


‘Step up to HE’ pre-arrival and induction resources.



Academic Integrity Induction online module.



Programme and module induction sessions, formative assessment activities and
summative assessment briefs.

4. Poor Academic Practice versus Academic Misconduct
4.1

When a student fails to adhere to the principles of academic integrity and/or good
academic practice, their work/conduct falls into one of three categories:

Poor Academic Practice

Academic Misconduct

Gross Academic Misconduct

Poor Academic Practice
4.2

For the purposes of this policy ‘poor academic practice’ refers to instances where a
student has failed to adhere fully to the academic conventions of a particular
assessment, despite them demonstrating attempts to do so.

4.3

Examples of poor academic practice include, but are not limited to:


Not adhering to all assessment brief requirements – e.g. not writing in an
appropriate style, not using an appropriate submission format.



Using sources, materials and/or equipment inappropriate for the assessment in
question.



Poor paraphrasing and/or over-use of direct quotation.



Errors or gaps in citation or acknowledgement of sources.



Errors or gaps in reference lists.

Academic Misconduct

2

4.4

For the purposes of this policy, ‘academic misconduct’ describes more serious breaches
of academic integrity and/or expected academic practice.

4.5

Examples of academic misconduct include, but are not limited to:


Plagiarism, whereby a student presents someone else's work or ideas as their own
without acknowledgement/citation.



Accessing unauthorised materials or assistance during exams.

RSA

Academic Integrity



Using generative AI tools outside the given parameters of the assessment brief
without acknowledgement or attribution.



Falsifying or inventing data, information, sources, citations and/or experiences
(e.g. in reflective assignments).



Colluding on an assignment without permission as part of the assessment brief.

Gross Academic Misconduct
4.6

For the purposes of this policy ‘gross academic misconduct’ describes severe violations of
academic integrity and/or flagrant breaches of expected academic standards. Gross
academic misconduct is considered particularly serious due to the potential impact on
the integrity and credibility of the University’s assessment processes, programmes of
study and awards/qualifications.

4.7

Examples of gross academic misconduct include, but are not limited to:


Contract cheating, whereby a student commissions a person or organisation to
complete assessments (including exams) on their behalf, e.g. in exchange for
some kind of financial payment or other reward.



Obtaining unauthorized access to exams papers, assessment briefs/answers and/or
another student’s work to gain an advantage in assessment.



Submitting forged and/or counterfeited elements of assessed work to gain an
advantage (e.g. forging signature of placement supervisor to bolster hours
completed).

5. Concerns about Academic Practice/Integrity

3

5.1

Concerns about academic integrity and/or poor academic practice may arise at any point
during a student’s journey. As a University community, it is everyone’s responsibility to
raise a concern where they believe a student is not adhering to the expectations of
academic integrity. This is particularly the case where there are suspicions of academic
misconduct or gross academic misconduct.

5.2

In most instances, concerns will be raised by academic members of staff teaching the
student in question, but they also may come from individuals connected to the student,
programme or University (e.g. fellow students, external markers, members of student
support services). Where this occurs, the person in question should raise a concern either
via the ‘Academic Misconduct Allegation Form’ or by contacting the Student
Circumstances & Casework Team. The student’s Programme Leader will be notified that
a concern has been raised.

5.3

In response to concerns regarding poor academic practice/academic integrity, the
Programme Leader, the student’s module tutor, or other member of the programme
team may arrange an Academic Concern Meeting.

5.4

Where multiple cases of academic misconduct are upheld, the University reserves
the right to review previously submitted work by the student. This may be
appropriate in cases where the nature of the misconduct raises legitimate concerns
about the integrity of earlier submissions. A review may be prompted by internal
processes, such as the identification of inconsistent result patterns or discrepancies
noted during moderation or external examining. Any decision to initiate a
retrospective review will follow the processes outlined in this policy.
RSA

Academic Integrity

6. Academic Concern Meetings
6.1

6.2

The need for an academic concern meeting might arise for a number of reasons:


A student has not engaged during key assessment/supervision activity but
unexpectedly submits a complete draft submission.



There appears to be a significant discrepancy between the student’s writing (i.e.
in emails or formative tasks) and the quality of submitted work for review.



Areas of poor academic practice (e.g. inauthentic referencing) or potential
plagiarism have been identified in formative/draft summative work.



A student has not responded at all to module activity, communications and/or the
supervision process (e.g. for dissertations).



A student has been observed engaging in inappropriate behaviour during a
formative class test or practical examination.



There is a concern about a piece of summative work, but not enough information
to determine the most appropriate course of action with regards to the academic
misconduct investigation process.



An academic integrity concern has arisen from a source other than the module
tutor.

The purpose of a meeting might vary slightly depending on the above, but is primarily to:


Establish whether there are legitimate grounds for concern regarding academic
integrity/authorship/expected standards.



Signpost any support services/resources relevant to the student and their work.



Communicate to the student any concerns regarding academic integrity or poor
academic practice and explain the process and potential consequences if a case
for academic misconduct is submitted in relation to their work.



If needed, generate valid evidence that can be used to support formal academic
integrity/misconduct investigations.

6.3

While an academic concern meeting may inform elements of an Academic Integrity
Investigation, it does not constitute an investigation in its own right and is not
accompanied by any formal warnings and/or penalties.

6.4

Wherever possible, academic concern meetings will be scheduled at a time mutually
agreed by the student and academic member of staff, taking into consideration any prior
commitments (e.g. childcare or other caring obligations or religious observances).
Students will also be offered the choice of meeting online or in-person. Further
information is available in the Guide to Academic Concern Meetings.

7. Academic Integrity Investigations
Step 1: Initial Concerns and Categorisation
7.1
4

Following the completion of a piece of summative assessment, the first marker will flag
any pieces of work that require further discussion in relation to poor academic practice
RSA

Academic Integrity

and/or academic integrity concerns. In instances where provisional marks for the
assessment are due to be released for other students, markers will be asked to add a
statement to the work notifying students that is it under review.
7.2

7.3

For any pieces of assessment flagged as having potential academic integrity concerns, the
first marker will liaise with either a second marker or the Module Leader to make an
initial judgement as to the most appropriate course of action:


If there is no evidence to substantiate concerns of poor academic practice, the
marker will mark the piece of assessment as normal.



If there is evidence of poor academic practice, the marker will mark the piece of
assessment as normal, using the standard marking criteria/rubric to acknowledge
instances where the work did not adhere to the expected academic
conventions/standard. This may result in a failed mark for the assignment. The
marker will also add a statement to the work acknowledging poor academic
practice and signposting students to appropriate support.



If there is believed to be sufficient evidence to pursue an academic misconduct
investigation, the marking team will submit a case to the next step in the process
via the ‘Academic Misconduct Referral Form’

If there is uncertainty in relation to the initial concerns and categorisation of the work,
the first marker and/or module tutor may wish to arrange an Academic Concern Meeting
to help make an appropriate judgement.

Step 2: Submitting Case for Academic Misconduct Investigation
7.4

Upon determining that there is sufficient cause to pursue an academic misconduct
investigation, the first marker, or other member of the marking team, will submit a case
via the ‘Academic Misconduct Referral Form’ which outlines the source and elements of
the suspicion, along with any evidence which supports the suspicion/allegation.

7.5

Upon submission of a case, the student in question will be notified that there is an
allegation of academic misconduct against their work. They will be presented with the
allegation, any supporting evidence submitted by the marking team, and will be given the
opportunity to respond to the details outlined in the case.

Step 3: Opportunity for Student to Respond

5

7.6

While there is no obligation for a student to respond to an allegation of academic
misconduct relating to their work, they will be given 7 days from the date of notification
to respond if they wish to do so.

7.7

The notification to the student regarding their academic misconduct investigation will
contain guidance on their options – for example if they wish to accept or contest the
allegation – and on how to structure their response. Students will also be able to upload
supporting evidence if they wish to.

7.8

Students can access advice and support with their response to an allegation from the
Guide to Academic Misconduct Investigations, as well as from the UBU Advice Centre.

7.9

While the University acknowledges that receiving an allegation of academic misconduct
can be concerning and/or upsetting for a student, it is important that academic integrity
concerns are investigated thoroughly, effectively and fairly, to safeguard the standards of
the University’s awards and qualifications for all students. At all stages of an academic
integrity investigation, students will be signposted to relevant resources and services to
RSA

Academic Integrity

ensure they are being appropriately supported through the process.

Step 4: Scrutiny of Case
7.10 Once the 7-day window for a student’s response has passed, the academic misconduct
investigation case will be assigned to an investigator who is independent of the module
and programme area. The investigator will review the allegation, supporting evidence
and any response received from the student. They will then make a judgement as to
whether, on the balance of probabilities, academic misconduct has occurred.
7.11 Using the Academic Misconduct Outcome and Penalties Framework, the investigator will
then make one of the following judgements:


Case Dismissed/Not Proven – there is insufficient evidence to substantiate
concerns of either academic misconduct or poor academic practice, so the
marking team will mark the piece of assessment as normal.



Poor Academic Practice – there is insufficient evidence to substantiate concerns
of academic misconduct, but there is evidence of poor academic practice. The
marker will mark the piece of assessment as normal, using the standard marking
criteria/rubric to acknowledge instances where the work did not adhere to the
expected academic conventions/standard. The marker will also add the standard
statement (from Step 1) to the work, acknowledging poor academic practice and
signposting students to appropriate support.



Academic Misconduct Upheld – there is sufficient evidence to conclude, on the
balance of probabilities, that the student’s work constitutes a breach of academic
integrity and/or expected academic practice. The student will receive notification
of this outcome and any corresponding penalty.



Further Scrutiny Required – there are additional/complicating factors or
exceptional circumstances relating to a particular student’s case which require
further scrutiny by an Academic Integrity Panel.



Suspected Gross Academic Misconduct – there is evidence of gross academic
misconduct which requires further scrutiny at an Academic Integrity Panel.

Step 5 (where required): Academic Integrity Panel
7.12 Where there is suspected gross academic misconduct, a student’s academic misconduct
investigation is particularly complex and/or the student has submitted an appeal against
a gross academic misconduct outcome/penalty, an Academic Integrity Panel will be
convened to review the case and agree an appropriate course of action.
7.13 An Academic Integrity Panel is made up of members who have had no previous
involvement with the case in question:

6



A member of academic staff, from outside the Faculty and/or School to which the
allegation relates, will chair the panel. In the case of appeals, this will be an
Associate Dean for Learning and Teaching.



A second member of academic staff, from outside the Faculty and/or School to
which the allegation relates, will be a member of the panel.



The UBU Education Officer, or another nominated member of UBU, will be a
member of the panel.

RSA

Academic Integrity

7.14 The following individuals may also be in attendance at the Academic Integrity Panel to
support the discussion and deliberations of the panel members:


The University’s Student Casework Manager, or another nominated member of the
Student Circumstances & Casework Team, to advise on elements of
regulation/policy/procedure.



The independent investigator (or nominee) assigned to the case, to provide
clarity on points of detail relating to the investigation. A nominee will only
include Associate Directors or Heads of Service from the Directorate of Student
Experience and Teaching Excellence.



Either the tutor involved in the original suspicion or another nominated member of
the Programme Team, to provide clarity on points of detail relating to the
assignment and/or the student’s submitted work.

7.15 The student, about whose work the Academic Misconduct Investigation relates, will be
invited to attend the Academic Integrity Panel. The scheduling of panels will, wherever
possible, take into consideration any prior commitments the student might have (e.g.
childcare or other caring obligations or religious observances).
7.16 While there is no obligation for the student to attend, the invitation allows them the
opportunity to discuss their work with the Panel. The student is able to bring someone to
the Panel to support them. Normally panels will be scheduled online, but students will be
given the opportunity of requesting an in-person panel if they wish.
7.17 Regardless of whether the student is able, or wishes to, attend the scheduled meeting,
they may provide a written statement to be submitted to the panel. Further guidance on
the purpose and conduct of the panel are available in the Guide to Academic Integrity
Panels.
7.18 Following the Academic Integrity Panel event, one of the following judgements will be
made in relation to the student’s case:

7



Case Dismissed/Not Proven – there is insufficient evidence to substantiate
concerns of either academic misconduct or poor academic practice, so the piece
of assessment will be marked as normal.



Poor Academic Practice - there is insufficient evidence to substantiate concerns
of academic misconduct, but there is evidence of poor academic practice. The
marker will mark the piece of assessment as normal, using the standard marking
criteria/rubric to acknowledge instances where the work did not adhere to the
expected academic conventions/standard. The marker will also add the standard
statement (see Step 1) to the work, acknowledging poor academic practice and
signposting students to appropriate support.



Academic Misconduct Upheld – there is sufficient evidence to conclude, on the
balance of probabilities, that the student’s work constitutes a breach of academic
integrity and/or expected academic practice. The student will receive notification
of this outcome and any corresponding penalty.



Gross Academic Misconduct Upheld – there is sufficient evidence to conclude, on
the balance of probabilities, that the student’s work constitutes a severe breach
of academic integrity and/or expected academic practice. The student will
receive notification of this outcome and any corresponding penalty.

RSA

Academic Integrity

8. Outcomes for Academic Misconduct Cases
8.1

Following the conclusion of an investigation, all cases will be subject to an official
outcome and any cases of academic misconduct or gross academic misconduct that are
upheld will also be subject to a penalty, as detailed in the Academic Misconduct Outcome
and Penalties Framework.

8.2

This Framework provides investigators with options for outcomes and penalties that are
proportionate and that, wherever possible, offer the student the ability to learn from
their academic misconduct/poor academic practice through reassessment. One example
of this is the University’s Plagiarism Awareness Programme which is designed and
delivered by Library staff to ensure that students understand the concept of plagiarism,
how to avoid it and how to use the appropriate referencing techniques and academic
conventions expected on their programme.

9. Appealing a Misconduct Outcome and/or Penalty
9.1

Students can appeal directly against the outcome and/or penalty of an academic
misconduct investigation within 14 days of their outcome notification. For clarity, the
deadline to appeal will be detailed in the notification email to the student.

9.2

There are two grounds for appeal:
9.2.1 There is evidence to demonstrate that the outcome and/or penalty was
disproportionate to the nature of the allegation or was not permitted within the
scope of the Academic Integrity Policy.
9.2.2 There is new evidence which, for good reason, was not available at the time of
the academic misconduct investigation and which could have affected the
outcome and/or penalty.

9.3

The Student Circumstances & Casework Team will review the evidence on which an
appeal is based and will determine whether it is sufficient to warrant consideration of
the appeal. If there appears to be sufficient evidence to warrant consideration of the
appeal, the student’s academic misconduct case will be reviewed.

Appeal against an Academic Misconduct outcome/penalty
9.4

Appeals against an academic misconduct outcome/penalty will be assigned to a new
investigator who is independent of the module/programme area, and who has had no
involvement with the original academic misconduct investigation. The investigator, with
support from a member of the Student Circumstances & Casework Team, will review
details of the original investigation, the appeal and any supporting evidence.

9.5

The student, about whose work the academic misconduct appeal relates, will normally be
invited to attend a meeting with the investigator. While there is no obligation for the
student to attend, the invitation allows them the opportunity to discuss their appeal.
Wherever possible, meetings will be scheduled at a time mutually agreed by the student
and the investigator. Meetings will normally be conducted online, but students may
request an in-person meeting if they wish. The student is able to bring someone to the
meeting to support them through the process.

9.6

Upon review of all the evidence, the investigator will then make a judgement as to
whether the appeal should be upheld, partially upheld or not upheld.

Appeal against a Gross Academic Misconduct outcome/penalty
8

RSA

Academic Integrity

9.7

Appeals against a gross academic misconduct outcome/penalty will be referred to a new
Academic Integrity Panel who is independent of the module/programme area, and who
has had no involvement with the original gross academic misconduct investigation. The
Panel will review details of the original investigation, the appeal and any supporting
evidence.

9.8

The student, about whose case the appeal relates, will be invited to attend the Academic
Integrity Panel and may also provide a written statement for the panel, whether they
choose to attend or not. While there is no obligation for the student to attend, the
invitation allows them the opportunity to discuss their appeal with the Panel. The
student is able to bring someone to the Panel to support them through the process.

9.9

Upon review of all the evidence, the Panel will then make a judgement as to whether the
appeal should be upheld, partially upheld or not upheld.

Completion of Procedures
9.10 Upon review of the appeal, the student will receive a completion of procedures letter
informing them whether their appeal has been rejected, upheld, partially upheld or not
upheld.
9.11 If the appeal is upheld or partially upheld, the original decision may be changed, or it
may remain the same, but the penalty may be altered. If the appeal is not upheld, the
original decision will stand.

Options Post-Appeal
9.12 If students are dissatisfied with the outcome of their appeal, they may be able to apply
for a review of the appeal, to the Office of the Independent Adjudicator for Higher
Education (OIA), provided the appeal is eligible under their rules.
9.13 Normally, students can only escalate their case to the OIA if they have exhausted the
stages in this procedure and received a completion of procedures letter.
9.14 Students must raise a complaint with the OIA within 12 months of receiving the
completion of procedures letter.
9.15 Students can complete an OIA Complaint Form online or download a copy from the OIA
website. Alternatively, students can telephone or write to the OIA for a form.

10. Consideration of Extenuating/Personal Circumstances
10.1 If students feel they are unable to engage with, and complete, their assessments to the
expected standard, they should submit a claim for extenuation through the agreed
Consideration of Personal Circumstances Policy, rather than submitting work which
breaches expectations of academic standards and integrity.
10.2 Claims of extenuating or personal circumstances will not influence decisions relating to
the outcomes of poor academic practice and/or academic misconduct investigations.
There may be very exceptional occasions whereby a student’s circumstances are taken
into consideration when determining the penalty applied as a result of an academic
misconduct investigation, but such consideration will not change the outcome of the
investigation itself.

11. Roles and Responsibilities
9

RSA

Academic Integrity

11.1 The Academic Integrity Policy is intended to provide a clear framework for making
decisions relating to poor academic practice and academic misconduct. It aims to
facilitate consistent and timely decision-making, allow for appropriate consideration in
relation to serious or complex cases, and ensure that both the academic standards of the
University are upheld and students are appropriately supported through the process.
11.2 All participants in the processes relating to this policy are expected to act in a supportive
and respectful manner, in line with staff and student contracts and codes of conduct.
11.3 All participants in the processes are also expected to adhere to any legal, regulatory and
policy requirements with regards to confidentiality and data protection.

Students
11.4 Students are expected to take responsibility for their own learning, to be proactive in
seeking support when they need it, and to ensure they submit work which is their own
and which complies with the expectations of academic integrity, academic standards,
and the conventions of the assessment in question.

Staff – Programme and Module Teams
11.5 Programme and module teams are expected to communicate expectations relating to
academic integrity to students at the beginning of their programme and at key points
thereafter (e.g. in summative assessment briefs)
11.6 Programme and module teams are also expected to maintain open and supportive
communication with students facing academic misconduct allegations, ensuring that
students are signposted or referred to appropriate sources of advice, guidance and
support.

Staff – Independent Investigators
11.7 Investigators are members of academic staff who are independent of both the student
and the programme and module area to which the piece of work under investigation
relates.
11.8 Investigators are expected to act in accordance with the process and corresponding
decision-making frameworks as outlined in this policy. Investigators are also expected to
engage with initial training and read any guidance available relating to the role prior to
undertaking an investigation.
11.9 Other than in formal contexts, such as an Academic Integrity Panel, investigators should
not communicate directly with students regarding their academic misconduct
investigation.

Staff – Student Circumstances & Casework Team
11.10 The Student Circumstances & Casework Team is responsible for implementing and
managing the day-to- day operations of the academic misconduct investigation
processes. This includes

10

RSA

Academic Integrity

supporting investigators and coordinating Academic Integrity Panels.
11.11 The Student Circumstances & Casework Team is expected to maintain accurate
records of all academic misconduct investigations and to report on cases, both for
the purposes of programme/module team enhancement planning as well as for
institutional oversight/ongoing policy review.

University of Bradford Union of Students (UBU)
11.12 UBU is expected to play a key role in championing academic integrity and good academic
practice among students, as well as highlighting to students the potential consequences
of not adhering to the expected standards.
11.13 The UBU Advice Centre is expected to help students navigate this policy and related
procedures, to ensure students are aware of their rights, roles and responsibilities.
11.14 UBU colleagues are also expected to maintain open and supportive communication with
students and members of UoB staff, as part of this process, to ensure that students are
signposted or referred to appropriate sources of advice, guidance and support in a joined
up and timely manner.
11.15 UBU also plays an important role in providing ongoing feedback to the University about
students’ experiences with the academic misconduct investigation process, to inform
policy review and continuous improvement activities.

12. Accessibility and Inclusivity
12.1 The Equality Act 2010 places a legal obligation on the University to make reasonable
adjustments to its services and meet the requirements of staff with a disability and/or other
specific needs. An Equality Impact Assessment of this policy has been provided in the
appendices for reference.
12.2 Where a student feels they may require additional support to navigate and/or participate
in the processes outlined in this policy, they should contact either their module tutor or
the UBU Advice Centre in the first instance. Measures to support participation may
include, for example, support to navigate systems, complete forms or upload evidence.
12.3 Where a member of staff feels they may require additional support to navigate and/or
participate in the processes outlined in this policy, they should contact their line
manager in the first instance. Measures to support participation may include, for
example, distribution of individual roles and responsibilities across a module/programme
team.

13. Oversight, Implementation and Support
13.1 This policy and its implementation are owned and overseen by the University of
Bradford’s Learning and Teaching Committee.
13.2 The Directorate of Student Experience & Teaching Excellence are responsible for the
operation of the policy and corresponding processes, as well as the ongoing schedule of
policy/process review and continuous improvement.
13.3 The policy and accompanying appendices shall be reviewed annually.

11

RSA

Academic Integrity

Academic Misconduct: Outcomes and Penalties Framework
NB: The below is not an exhaustive list and will be reviewed and expanded upon on a continual basis as new categories emerge. Examples of each category and guidance
regarding severity of penalty are available in the Academic Integrity Scenarios. If any queries on a category or evidence submitted in relation to an allegation, please contact
academicmisconduct@bradford.ac.uk initially.
Outcome
Poor
Academic
Practice

Evidence of…
Not adhering to all assessment brief requirements.
Poor paraphrasing and/or over-use of direct quotation.
Using sources, materials and/or equipment inappropriate for the assessment.
Errors or gaps in reference lists and/or in-text citations.
Presenting someone else's work or ideas as their own without attempt at
acknowledgement/citation.

Academic
Misconduct




Upheld misconduct outcome on record.
Undertake reassessment and pass the compromised
component.

Using generative AI tools outside the given parameters of the assessment brief without
Penalty dependent on the nature and extent of the misconduct,
acknowledgement or attribution.
but could include:
 Component capped at zero.
Falsifying or inventing data, information, sources, citations and/or experiences (e.g. in
 Module capped at pass mark.
reflective assignments).
 Module capped at zero (i.e. for credit only).
Colluding on an assignment without permission as part of the assessment brief.

Being in possession of, and/or using, unauthorised materials during an exam.

Gross
Academic
Misconduct

Penalty
 Standard statement on impacted submission.
 Penalise poor academic practice within scope of the
assessment rubric.
 Signposting to support/developmental resources.

Allegations within the ‘academic misconduct’ category, but with any of the following
additional characteristics:
 A student has had two or more upheld academic misconduct outcomes in
any previous semester, stage or level of their studies, with a combined
credit value exceeding 40 credits.
 The nature of the allegation means that a conversation with the student
about their work is necessary to determine genuine authorship, and the
academic concern meeting did not provide sufficient clarity for the
investigator to reach a decision (e.g. in the case of generative AI use on a
dissertation-type assignment).
 There are complexities relating to a student’s personal circumstances which

And, where applicable:
 Attend the Plagiarism Awareness Programme (PAP).
 Attend an Academic Concern Meeting/Tutorial.
 Pass the module in full, if failed.

Penalty dependent on the nature and extent of the misconduct,
but could include:
 Upheld misconduct outcome on record and transcript.
 Reassessment for capped mark or credit only.
 No opportunity for reassessment
 Repeat elements of programme (e.g. modules or stage).
 Suspension from studies.
 Withdrawal from programme with or without award of
credit.
 Rescinding of credit/award.

Issue beyond
Academic
Misconduct

require further scrutiny/discussion to determine an appropriate penalty.
 The misconduct relates to a student who has already qualified and/or has
withdrawn and received an intermediate award.
Contract cheating, whereby a student commissions a person or organisation to
complete assessments/exams on their behalf (e.g. in exchange for some kind of
financial payment or other reward.)
Obtaining unauthorised access to exams papers, assessment briefs/answers and/or
another student’s work to gain an advantage in assessment.
Submitting forged and/or counterfeited elements of assessed work to gain an
advantage (e.g. submitting fabricated ethics approval documentation or forging the
signature of placement supervisor to bolster hours).
If misconduct is broader in scope than solely academic integrity issues – e.g. relating to
disciplinary policy, fitness to practice/study, and/or criminal proceedings.

Dependent on outcome from other process(es), but any penalty
relating to a student’s academic record will be processed via the
examination board processes as normal.

14. Version 1.1 updates
Version 1.1 Updates Section 5. Concerns about Academic Practice/ Integrity
Creation of a new clause
5.4 Where multiple cases of academic misconduct are upheld, the
University reserves the right to review previously submitted work by the
student. This may be appropriate in cases where the nature of the
misconduct raises legitimate concerns about the integrity of earlier
submissions. A review may be prompted by internal processes, such as
the identification of inconsistent result patterns or discrepancies noted
during moderation or external examining. Any decision to initiate a
retrospective review will follow the processes outlined in this policy.
Section 7. Academic Integrity Investigations
Clause 7.14 updated
The independent investigator (or nominee) assigned to the case, to
provide clarity on points of detail relating to the investigation. A
nominee will only include Associate Directors or Heads of Service from
the Directorate of Student Experience and Teaching Excellence.
Academic Misconduct: Outcomes and Penalties Framework
Gross academic misconduct categories update
Allegations within the ‘academic misconduct’ category, but with any of
the following additional characteristics:
• A student has had two or more upheld academic misconduct
outcomes in any previous semester, academic sstage or /level of their
studies, with a combined credit value exceeding 40 credits. .
• The nature of the allegation means that a conversation with the
student about their work is necessary to determine genuine
authorship, and the academic concern meeting did not provide
sufficient clarity for the investigator to reach a decision (e.g. in the
case of generative AI use on a dissertation-type assignment).
• There are complexities relating to a student’s personal circumstances
which require further scrutiny/discussion to determine an appropriate
penalty.
Gross academic misconduct penalty update
Penalty dependent on the nature and extent of the misconduct, but
could include:
• Upheld misconduct outcome on record and transcript.
• Reassessment for capped mark or credit only.
• No opportunity for reassessment
• Repeat elements of programme (e.g. modules or stage).
• Suspension from studies.
• Withdrawal from programme with or without award of credit.
