UGM AI Literacy Framework

New May 2025

Introduction

The aim of this tutorial is to equip learners with a critical understanding of Artificial Intelligence (AI) technologies with a focus on Generative AI (GAI). It seeks to build not only technical proficiency but also adaptability to apply knowledge of AI literacy in real-world context for problem-solving whilst being aware of ethical practices. Co-designed with students, the LEAP Online team and researchers in learning and information technologies, this framework with its four-step approach (i) Prepare (ii) Understand (iii) Apply (iv) Responsible use, ensures that learners build on their existing academic, ICT and digital literacy skills as they progress through foundational, in-depth, practical and responsible aspects of AI technologies integration for learning, research and professional development. Engaging with each of the four core elements is essential for building a comprehensive awareness of AI.

By working through the framework, which is designed to be a guide and a catalyst for thoughtful, responsible and innovative engagement with AI, learners can expect to develop five key GAME attributes – Adaptability, Lifelong Learning, Problem Solving, Self-Awareness and Confidence. These attributes are essential for navigating complexities of AI, enabling individuals to continuously adapt to technological advancements, solve emerging challenges, maintain a reflective understanding of their role in a tech-driven world, and confidently apply their skills in diverse settings.

Don't forget to complete the assessment to earn your digital badge!

Acknowledgements:

We are grateful to the following individuals for their valuable contributions to the development of this LEAP Online section - Acknowledgements [PDF]

Tutorial Accessibility

We’ve built LEAP Online Tutorial to be as easy to use as possible. You can use the Read Aloud feature in Microsoft Edge to listen to the content on each page, and all our videos have transcripts available through the Closed Captions button [CC] within the video player. If you’d like a printed version, you can print individual pages. But before you do, please think about whether you really need to print — going digital is often the more sustainable choice for the environment.

Assessment

If you found this useful.

This section links to:

- My Academic Development

- My Personal Development

- My Student Engagement

- My Digital Literacy

Mike Sharples

The UGM AI Literacy Framework has been endorsed by Mike Sharples Emeritus Professor of Educational Technology at The Open University, UK.

"The tutorial is essential for all students to develop critical literacy in a world infused with AI"

Read more about Mike Sharples

AI Literacy

Luke Evans (Academic Skills Coordinator) talks to David Howard (Academic Skills Team Leader), Nurun Nahar (Assistant Teaching Professor, GMBS) and Graeme Prescott (eLearning Developer) about AI literacy and the implications of AI usage in education.

Listen here

GAME@UGM

This section maps to the following GAME (Graduate Attribute Matrix for Employability) attributes. For more information about GAME attributes visit the Skills Hub Careers and Employability section.

This section maps to the Career Passport.

Complete the assessment in this section to earn 5 Career Passport points.

The Career Passport is UGMs employability programme designed to help you build real skills, gain experience, and feel confident about your future.

Share this page
