Version: 1.3
Effective from: September .2025 (AY 2025-26)
Policy owner: Academic Registrar

Academic Integrity and Misconduct Policy and
Procedure
1.

Scope and Purpose

1.1

HSU is committed to academic integrity, as demonstrated by signing the Academic Integrity Charter for
UK Higher Education. We are committed to developing high standards of academic and professional
practice among our academic community, including all students. We are committed to safeguarding the
standards of our academic awards. We expect all members of the academic community to act with
professionalism, and this includes acting with, and promoting, honesty and academic integrity.

1.2

In the interests of ensuring the maintenance of academic and professional standards HSU will ensure that
all suspected cases of student academic misconduct are taken seriously and investigated thoroughly in
line with this policy and procedure.

1.3

This document defines academic misconduct and outlines what happens when academic misconduct is
suspected. It applies to:
• all current students enrolled on taught undergraduate and postgraduate HSU awards, including
awards delivered under Educational Partnerships, unless adaptations to procedure have been
agreed and defined within the Operations Manual and contract. Where this is the case, relevant
students will be informed of any adaptation.
• All Apprentices working towards their underpinning degree and their apprenticeship award
Where separate arrangements or rules apply, the target group or groups are named in the paragraph.

1.4

Allegations of misconduct relating to postgraduate research students will be considered initially under the
Research Misconduct Policy. An initial review will determine whether the allegation meets the definition of
research misconduct and should proceed under that policy, or whether it falls within the scope of another
formal process. If it is determined to be a case of academic misconduct, it will be referred for
consideration under the Academic Integrity & Misconduct Policy.

1.5

This policy and procedure is part of the Student Governance Framework. The policy principles applicable
to all student governance apply. These are available in the Student Governance Framework document.

2.

Regulatory Context

2.1

This policy and procedure has been written with direct reference to the principles set out in the QAA
Academic Integrity Charter for UK Higher Education, and the principles set out in the Office of the
independent Adjudicator (the OIA) Good Practice Framework.

3.

Definitions

3.1

HSU uses the following definition of academic misconduct:
“Any action by a student which gives or has the potential to give an unfair advantage in an
examination or assessment, or might assist someone else to gain an unfair advantage, or any
activity likely to undermine the integrity essential to scholarship and research.”

Assisting another student to undertake any such action is also defined as academic misconduct. This
definition is used by the Office of the independent Adjudicator (the OIA) in the Good Practice Framework.
The definition applies to both assessment of practice and assessment in practice.
Page 1 of 29

3.2

A non-exhaustive list of examples of academic misconduct is available in Appendix A: Examples of
behaviour or actions which may constitute Academic Misconduct. This includes misconduct during timeconstrained assessments eg examinations and practical assessments, as specified in the Examination
Rules available in Appendix B: Examination Rules.

3.3

HSU recognises that in some instances suspected misconduct is due to unintentional poor academic
practice. Poor academic practice is defined as a lack of knowledge, understanding and practice in academic
writing and assessment. Academic failings of this kind which are identified through this procedure will be
addressed via the application of the assessment criteria, and students will be expected to educate
themselves appropriately to avoid any reoccurrence. Advice about how to access support and guidance on
academic writing and study skills is available in Appendix C: Support and guidance on Academic Writing and
Study Skills, and via the student portal.

4.

Key Responsibilities

4.1

Academic Board is responsible for overseeing updates and amendments to policy principles outlined
within this policy and procedure

4.2

Academic Standards and Quality Committee (ASQC) is responsible for overseeing the application of this
policy and procedure, for recommending changes to Academic Board and considers academic
misconduct data via annual reporting.

4.3

The Assessment Board confirms the outcome of academic misconduct investigations and refers to this
when determining student results in accordance with the Assessment Regulations.

4.4

The Academic Misconduct Panel considers suspected academic misconduct where this is deemed to be
extensive or of a serious nature.

4.5

Academic Schools investigate suspected cases of academic misconduct and provide students with
information and advice relating to academic integrity and good academic practice.

4.6

Markers and assessors are responsible for identifying potential cases of academic misconduct and
investigating these in line with the requirements of this procedure.

4.7

Exam invigilators and end-point assessment independent assessors are responsible for ensuring that
breaches of examination rules are identified and reported appropriately and act in accordance with the
Examination Rules (Appendix B: Examination Rules.)

4.8

The Academic Registrar and Student Governance team are responsible for the management of all
suspected academic misconduct cases, for providing advice and guidance on the application of the policy
and procedures and for the upkeep of all casefiles. The Academic Registrar oversees the generation of
annual and routine reporting data. Where this policy and procedure refers to the ‘Student Governance
team’ this is under the management of the Academic Registrar.

4.9

The HSU Students’ Union provide advice and guidance to students and provide student representation by
acting as panel members for the Academic Misconduct Panels.

4.10 The Student Services team provide support to students who are being investigated via this policy and
procedure.
4.11 All staff and students, as part of the University community, are responsible for working with academic
integrity and avoiding academic misconduct, to maintain the academic standards of our awards and the
quality of the education and student experience we provide.
4.12 Under this policy and associated procedures any University role or officeholder or officer of the Students’
Union may act through their appointed nominee.
Student Responsibilities
4.13 HSU will ensure that students are provided with opportunities to develop their academic integrity and
good academic practice at appropriate points throughout their study (for example, at induction and during
teaching and learning).

Page 2 of 29

4.14 All students are responsible for:
• understanding what academic integrity and good academic practice are and working to achieve these
• taking ownership for academic development and ensuring that any poor academic practice identified
at any time is addressed
• understanding the principles of good academic conduct and adhering to this
• respecting the rights of all other students, and of the academic community and upholding these
• following all applicable professional and ethical conventions and requirements, and supporting the
academic community to do the same
• familiarising themselves with this policy and procedure and acting in accordance with it. In the event of
an allegation of academic misconduct, ignorance of the requirements of the policy will not be accepted
as an excuse for misconduct or a justification for mitigation of penalties
• avoiding any actions which may seek to give unfair advantage to themselves or others within the
academic community
• seeking further advice and assistance if there are any doubts as to what needs to be done to work
within the principles and practices of academic integrity and avoid academic misconduct
• making sure academic work is kept secure and taking measures to ensure work is protected. Failure
to secure work, and providing opportunities for other students to gain access to it, may be regarded as
academic misconduct (even if this is without their explicit consent)
4.15 HSU considers that any student who fails to follow these principles is being dishonest. This is considered
dishonest to their peers who have worked hard to obtain their results without deception, to academic staff
who have taught and assessed them and also to themselves, as these students are not presenting a true
reflection of their knowledge and abilities. Students who cheat risk their academic and future careers, and
also potentially enter the workforce without the necessary skills, knowledge and competence.
4.16 The Skills and Post-16 Education Bill (28 April 2022) made it illegal to provide contract cheating services
(essay mills) for financial gain and/or to advertise to provide or arrange for another person to provide a
cheating service. Any student considering the use of such a service should therefore be aware that they
would not only be in breach of this Academic Integrity and Misconduct Policy and Procedure, but would
also be engaging with a body or person that is operating outside the law.
4.17 If students are aware that other students have submitted work that is not genuine, they should report this
via reporting@aecc.ac.uk. Please note that anonymous allegations cannot be accepted, but students who
make reports will be treated in confidence and will only be asked to assist in investigations by providing
information where essential. Students will not be penalised for bringing such matters to the University’s
attention, unless this is done with malicious intent.
Responsibilities of the Assessment Board
4.18 Where academic misconduct is being investigated, the Assessment Board will not come to a decision on
the student’s result until the Academic Misconduct procedures, and any subsequent investigations and
actions have been completed.
4.19 The outcome of Academic Misconduct procedures will be presented to the Assessment Board for
confirmation and for inclusion in its deliberations. Any required reassessment(s) shall only be carried out
once the Assessment Board has met to consider the student’s overall profile, and the assessment board
retains sole responsibility to act on behalf of the Academic Board (delegated authority) to make decisions
on the progression of, and academic award to individual students.

Page 3 of 29

5.

Policy Principles

5.1

Identification of suspected academic misconduct- Identifying suspected academic misconduct and
making decisions will usually involve academic judgment. Where an academic judgment is made it will be
based on evidence.

5.2

Categorisation of misconduct- The nature and circumstance of the suspected academic misconduct will
be taken into account when considering escalation to the appropriate procedure and when establishing
any penalty to be imposed. The student’s level of study (and experience of UK higher education), the
nature of the misconduct and intent will be considered.

5.3

Repeated action and deception- All academic misconduct is considered serious and will be treated
accordingly. However, where misconduct is found to be repeated, or compounded by deception, or
otherwise aggravated, a more stringent penalty will be imposed.

5.4

Plagiarism detection software- To promote good academic practice, detect possible plagiarism, and
protect the intellectual property of both the university and its students’, written coursework is submitted
through Turnitin, via the Virtual Learning Environment (VLE).

5.5

Burden of proof and evidence requirements- The standard of proof will be based on the ‘the balance of
probabilities’ - that is, in all the circumstances it is more likely than not that academic misconduct has
occurred. Evidence may include a Turnitin originality report but this must be supported by additional
evidence and the similarity score will not be utilised as an absolute identifier of academic misconduct.

5.6

Deliberative consideration and avoidance of bias- Suspected Academic Misconduct will be considered
by more than one member of staff at each point in the procedure, and differentiating roles at different
stages of the procedures is an important way of avoiding bias.

5.7

Previous failure of detection- Where academic misconduct is suspected or alleged, a student may not
use the previous failure of any member of academic staff to detect academic misconduct at an earlier
point in their studies as a defence. Apprentices may not cite the lack of detection of evidence of similar
misconduct in their workplace as a defense.

5.8

Referral to Fitness to Practise Policy and Procedures- Students who have been found to have
committed academic misconduct which may have implications in respect of fitness to practise, will be
referred for consideration under the Fitness to Practise Policy and Procedure.

5.9

Data protection regulations and the Equality Act 2010 - any information shared about any alleged or
proven academic misconduct will be disclosed to as few people as possible, consistent with effective
investigation.

Page 4 of 29

6.

Academic misconduct procedure

6.1

The diagram below provides an overview of the Academic Misconduct procedures

Page 5 of 29

Procedural principles
6.2
6.3

All students are encouraged to seek advice from the Students’ Union as soon as possible.
Apprentices are encouraged to discuss the allegation, the procedure and the outcomes with their
employer.

6.4

All direct contact with a student under suspicion of academic misconduct shall be formal, involving more
than one member of the teaching staff in any face-to-face discussion with the student.

6.5

Written records shall be kept of the key points and conclusions of meetings. Copies of all correspondence
and other relevant documentation must be provided as part of the school submission to Student
Governance.

6.6

To ensure the Student Record is accurately maintained, the Student Governance team will inform the
relevant Course Administrator of any assessment which is being considered under these procedures, and
will be informed of the outcome of the procedure.

6.7

The mark and the work should not be released to the student until the suspected academic misconduct
has been investigated and this procedure completed.

6.8

Apprentices will be made aware in writing that a notification outlining the circumstances related to any
suspected academic misconduct will be sent to their employer, on a specific date. This is to allow the
apprentice to make their employer aware prior to the official notification. The apprentice’s employer will
also be formally notified about the outcome of this process.

6.9

Allegations which involve more than one student, or a group of students will be managed in accordance
with the procedures set out below, but will require specific arrangements and additional communications
to ensure that all students involved are provided with the appropriate information.

6.10 Evidence of academic misconduct which comes to light after the results of the assessment have been
ratified by the Assessment Board shall be considered initially and promptly in accordance with this
procedure. At the conclusion of the process, External Examiners will be informed of any decision that
materially affects the original decision of the Assessment Board.
7.

School-level investigation

7.1

School-level investigation procedures will be delegated to the equivalent function within Educational
Partnership organisations as standard, and the HSU Link Tutor will be one of the members of staff
involved in considering the suspected offence. Any exception to this procedure will be defined at the point
of partner approval and the detail made clear to all relevant students.

7.2

The member of staff who has identified the suspected academic misconduct will arrange to meet with the
Course Leader to consider the case within 3 working days.

7.3

If the Course Leader was responsible for identifying the suspected misconduct, they will nominate an
appropriate senior member of academic staff (such as another Course Leader), normally from within the
School to take part in the investigation.

7.4

The Course Leader will be responsible for recording the outcome of the investigation, using the template
available in Appendix D: School Level Investigation Outcome Report.

7.5

Evidence considered at the School-level investigation should be as comprehensive as possible, and
additional information gathered as required. Additional guidance on appropriate sources of evidence is
available in Appendix E: Guidance on the provision of Evidence.

7.6

Where it is deemed necessary, the School- level investigation may request a meeting with the student to
conduct an Academic Integrity Viva. This must be completed in accordance with the requirements set out
in Appendix F: School Level Investigation- Academic Integrity Viva requirements and report template. The
report from the Viva should be presented on the required template to the re-convened School-level
meeting within five working days of the date of the Viva meeting. The outcome of the School level
Investigation should be based on the report and all other evidence collated.

Page 6 of 29

7.7

Outcomes of School level Investigation
The School level investigation outcome will be one of the following:
• There is no case to answer
• There is no case to answer but the student may have made small mistakes in their work
• There is evidence of Poor Academic Practice
• There is evidence to demonstrate that a first offence of academic misconduct of a minor nature has
occurred (Minor Academic Misconduct)
• There is evidence to indicate that academic misconduct of a more extensive or serious nature, or a
second (or repeated) offence, may have occurred. (Major Academic Misconduct)

7.8

The School level-Investigation members should refer to the guidance on determining outcomes to aid
their decision-making and to ensure all relevant next steps are completed. This is available in Appendix
G: Determining outcomes: Guidance for staff involved in School Level Investigations.

7.9

The outcome of the School -level investigation will be confirmed to the Student Governance team within 5
working days of the final School-level investigation meeting. This will be provided on the template
available in Appendix D: School Level Investigation Outcome Report., along with all evidence and
reports.

7.10 The Student Governance team will take action as outlined in Appendix H: Communicating School level
Academic Misconduct outcomes- guidance for staff. This will include confirming the outcome and, where
applicable, the penalty to the student. Students who are found to have committed Minor Academic
Misconduct will have the opportunity to request that the case is considered via an Academic Misconduct
Panel.
8.

Academic Misconduct Panel

8.1

Where the outcome of the School-level investigation is that evidence shows that academic misconduct of
an extensive or serious nature has occurred, or where there have been previous offences, the case will
be considered by the Academic Misconduct Panel.

8.2

The Academic Misconduct Panel will be convened by the Student Governance team. The student will be
informed of the nature of the allegation and the outcome of the School Level Investigation, and notified
that a panel will be convened.

8.3

Normally a Panel will be convened within 20 working days of the outcome of the School Level
Investigation and the student will be given a minimum of 10 working days’ notice before the meeting of
the Panel, except where they have agreed in writing that shorter notice is acceptable. In some
circumstances additional time may be required to convene a panel. Any delay will be communicated to
the student and all communications retained on the case file.

8.4

For cases involving more than one student, or a group of students, the Chair and the Secretary will decide
on the most appropriate way to deal with the students suspected in alignment with the principles set out in
the OIA Good Practice Framework [78/79], including:

• the conduct of the hearing in terms of meeting with individuals or a group of students
• the application of potential outcome(s), which could affect the whole group or individuals
• the application of potential penalties, which could affect the whole group or individuals
8.5

8.6

Panel membership
The Academic Misconduct Panel will normally consist of:
• a Head of School or experienced senior member of academic staff (that the student is not
studying in) (to act as Chair);
• an independent senior member of the academic staff who was not involved in the School-level
investigation of the case;
• a representative of the Students’ Union executive.
The role of the student union panel member is to act as a full member of the panel in determining the
matter under consideration and not they must not act as an advocate for the student suspected of the
academic misconduct. Any prior involvement in supporting the student with the case must be declared
and another SU representative nominated.

Page 7 of 29

8.7

The Academic Registrar, or appointed nominee will act as Secretary to the Panel and will provide advice
and guidance on the policy, procedures, adaptations and application of requirements, but is not a
decision-making member of the Panel.

8.8

The Course Leader or convener of the School-level Investigation meeting will attend to set out the allegation
and any evidence relating to the suspected misconduct. If attendance is not possible, a nominee may be
appointed, or where necessary (to ensure swift resolution) the summary allegation and evidence may be
provided in the form of a short written document.

8.9

Documentation and Representation
The student will be given an opportunity to provide a written explanation, and provide documentary evidence.
This should include the detail of any circumstances or mitigating factors that the student believes may
provide the panel with an explanation of their actions, along with supporting evidence. The timeline for
submission of any statement or explanation will be advised in writing.

8.10 Students are encouraged to be open and honest. Formal procedures will be reduced in length and
complexity if the facts are known and agreed at an early stage. If a student admits to suspected academic
misconduct before the panel, the meeting will still go ahead, but the admission will be considered by the
panel and may inform decision making.
8.11 The Student Governance team will collate the casefile and will include:
- All information and documentation presented following the School level investigation
- A summary of the allegation, the detail of procedures undertaken to date
- The student statement or explanation, and any evidence provided
8.12 Where the Chair of the Panel and/or the Secretary consider that the Panel would benefit from additional
information or input from a specific member of staff (or in some specific circumstances from an expert
external to the university) to address any question of fact or specific complexity, a written report will be
requested in advance of the panel and included within the documentation. Where appropriate, the Chair
may decide it is appropriate for this additional member of staff to be in attendance at the panel to provide
expert evidence and advice to the Panel.
8.13 The Panel and the student will be provided with the documentation to be considered at least 5 working
days before the meeting of the Panel.
8.14 The student will also be advised of the names of the Panel members and will be asked to indicate if they
have any legitimate concerns that any member of the Panel might not be impartial towards them,
providing supporting evidence. Should the Academic Registrar accept that the student’s concerns are
legitimate, the Panel member(s) will be replaced. This may require the Panel to be re-scheduled.
Academic Misconduct Panel proceedings
8.15 Students may be accompanied by a friend or representative (not acting in a legal capacity). This is
normally another enrolled student of the University or Students’ Union representative. Students are
encouraged to make use of this provision. For an apprentice this may also be their employer or their
employer’s representative.
8.16 Either party may call witnesses. Details of all witnesses will be requested when the details of the Panel
are provided and must be confirmed at least three working days prior to the Panel.
8.17 If, for exceptional reasons the student is unable to attend the meeting of the Panel, the student may
choose to be represented by a member of the SU Executive or other current student willing to act in this
capacity. In this case the Panel will proceed as normal basing its considerations on the evidence
available.
8.18 Where a medical practitioner has advised that the student’s state of health makes attendance
impossible or inadvisable, the case will not be considered formally until the student is deemed fit by their
medical adviser to appear before the Panel.
8.19 If a student or the course team representative fails to attend a meeting of the Panel without notifying the
Panel in advance, the meeting will proceed as normal.
8.20 In cases where members of an Academic Misconduct Panel learn that a student was previously involved
in a suspected case where the outcome was ‘no case to answer’, this must not be considered during the
hearing and should not prejudice the decision of the Panel for the current case.
Page 8 of 29

Panel agenda
8.21 The Academic Misconduct Panel is responsible for determining whether academic misconduct has been
committed.
8.22 The agenda for a meeting of the Academic Misconduct Panel shall be as follows:

i)

Introduction of those present

ii)

Course Leader presentation of the allegation (normally no more than 10 minutes, including
presentation from any witnesses)

iii) Opportunity for the Academic Misconduct Panel to question the Course Leader
iv) Opportunity for the student to question, through the Chair, the Course Leader
v)

Student and/or representative presentation (normally no more than 10 minutes, including
presentation from any witnesses)

vi) Opportunity for the Academic Misconduct Panel to question the student
vii) Opportunity for the Course Leader to question, through the Chair, the student
viii) Course Leader summing up (5 minutes). New evidence is not admissible at this stage
ix) Student and/or representative summing up (5 minutes). New evidence is not admissible at this stage.
x)

Private Panel deliberations (the student and the Course Leader will be asked to leave prior to this).

8.23 The agenda may be varied if appropriate and may be preceded by a private meeting of the Panel. Any
amendments will be requested by the Chair prior to the Panel meeting and all parties will be informed by
the Student Governance team.
8.24 If witnesses have been called, they will attend only to present their evidence and to answer any
questions that the Panel or the other party may put to them. Once their evidence has been heard and
there are no more questions, witnesses will be required to withdraw.
8.25 In exceptional circumstances, the Panel may request additional evidence if it is considered that such
evidence is likely to significantly affect the outcome. If all parties, including the student, agree that the
Panel members may consider this evidence and reach a decision without further need for the student or
Course Leader to have an opportunity to respond to the additional evidence, then all parties will be
allowed to depart, and the decision will be communicated to all parties in writing. Otherwise the Academic
Misconduct Panel may decide that the meeting would need to be adjourned to give all parties the
opportunity to have time to prepare and respond to the new evidence.
8.26 While the Academic Misconduct Panel is considering the evidence, the student and the Course Leader
must be available and may be required to provide further information or clarification to the Panel. If the
Panel needs further information or clarification, both parties shall be recalled to the hearing.
8.27 The Academic Misconduct Panel shall reach one of the following decisions, based on the standard of
proof on the balance of probability:
•
There is no case to answer
•
There is no case to answer but the student may have made small mistakes in their work
•
There is evidence of Poor Academic Practice
•
There is evidence to demonstrate that a first offence of academic misconduct of a minor nature has
occurred
•
There is evidence to indicate that academic misconduct of a more extensive or serious nature, or a
second (or repeated) offence, has occurred.
8.28 If it is determined that academic misconduct has been committed the Academic Misconduct Panel will
judge the seriousness of the misconduct, and decide what penalty should be applied, as appropriate to the
case and in reference to the advice provided below, and in line with the tariff of penalties outlined in
Appendix I: Tariff of Penalties- Academic Misconduct Panel.
8.29 Neither exceptional personal circumstances nor the impact of a decision on the student’s current work
and employment will be considered grounds for excusing academic misconduct. However, a Panel may
take such circumstances (with appropriate supporting evidence) into account and use its discretion if the
evidence demonstrates that the student’s judgement at the time of the alleged misconduct would have
Page 9 of 29

been severely impaired due to these circumstances. It is for the Panel to decide if the exceptional
personal circumstances are deemed to have severely impaired a student’s judgement. Such
circumstances may then be considered in relation to the penalty imposed, but not to the decision on
whether academic misconduct has occurred.
8.30 The outcome and any penalties shall be confirmed in writing to both parties within 5 working days.
9.

Penalties

9.1

Penalties must be in accordance with the Tariff of Penalties set out in Appendix I: Tariff of PenaltiesAcademic Misconduct Panel.

9.2

Where the Panel determines that academic misconduct has occurred, a penalty will be imposed. The
nature of the penalty is a matter of academic judgement for the Panel.

9.3

Points that may be taken into account in determining the appropriateness of a particular penalty may
include:
o the student’s level of study, their experience in UK HE and the guidance that has been made available
to them;
o whether this is a student’s first offence
o the impact of the misconduct on the assessment
o

nature or seriousness of the misconduct

o whether the student accepts that they have committed academic misconduct.
o whether evidence has been presented which indicates that the student’s judgement at the time of the
alleged misconduct would have been severely impaired due to personal circumstances
9.4

The penalty and any follow up requirements will be clearly articulated within the outcome letter.

9.5

Students enrolled on courses leading to professional registration who have been found to have committed
academic misconduct will be informed of requirements for their case to be considered under the Fitness
to Practise Policy and Procedure. If the penalty included a final written warning, referral to fitness to
practise is automatic. The Panel will have the discretion to request referral for all other cases, based on
the potential impact on professional practice.

10. Appeals
10.1 The decision of the Academic Misconduct Panel is considered one of academic judgement against
which students may not appeal.
10.2 However, appeals may be lodged on the grounds of:
• Procedural irregularity: where there is evidence that there were irregularities in the
application of the procedure which are of such a nature as to cause reasonable doubt whether
the same decision would have been reached had they not occurred. This includes
irregularities relating to unreasonable decision making and the application of disproportionate
penalties.
• New evidence: when relevant new evidence is presented which the student was unable, for
valid and compelling reasons, to provide earlier in the process. This does not include
exceptional personal circumstances which had not been previously disclosed.
• Prejudice or Bias: if there is evidence of prejudice or bias on the part of the person or
persons conducting the investigation and/or panel
10.3 Students who wish to appeal on these grounds must provide, in writing, full details of their case (with
supporting evidence) to the Student Governance team within 10 working days of the official notification
of the outcome of the Academic Misconduct Panel.
10.4 Where the appeal is based on the presentation of fresh evidence, the student should forward it or a
summary of it, including explaining why this could not have been provided earlier in the process
10.5 The Academic Registrar will consider the information submitted. If there appears to be valid grounds
for the appeal, they will not overturn the decision of the Academic Misconduct Panel but will refer to an
academic misconduct panel. A new Panel will be convened with a membership not including any of
those on the original Panel. Notification that the matter will be considered by a new Panel will be sent
Page 10 of 29

to the student within 5 working days, and the establishment of the Panel will follow the procedures
outlined above.
10.6 When a student has exhausted all internal procedures, the Student Governance team will send a
Completion of Procedures letter within 5 working days of the procedure completing, or the request for
the letter being made.
10.7 Health Sciences University subscribes to the independent scheme for the review of student
complaints. If students are dissatisfied with the outcome they may be able to apply for a review of the
case to the Office of the Independent Adjudicator for Higher Education (OIA) provided that the
complaint you take to the OIA is eligible under its Rules. Should the student decide to make a
complaint to the OIA, ther OIA Complaint Form must be received by the OIA within 12 months of the
date of the completion of procedures letter. The OIA’s complaint form is available online
http://oiahe.org.uk/making-a-complaint-to-the-oia/oia-complaint-form.aspx .The OIA also publishes An
Introduction to the OIA Scheme for Students, which can be downloaded from
https://www.oiahe.org.uk/media/f1db35pi/2023-intro-to-the-oia-for-students.pdf. Guidance on
submitting a complaint to the OIA and the OIA Complaint Form can also be found on the OIA’s website
http://www.oiahe.org.uk/making-a-complaint-to-the-oia/how-to-make-a-complaint.aspx .
11.

Monitoring and review of academic misconduct cases taken to Academic Misconduct Panel

11.1 The Student Governance team will prepare an annual review of academic misconduct across all
awards, to be considered by Academic Standards and Quality Committee, with a view to identifying
any trends and whether there is a need to revise any policy or practices. Any indicators at course or
School level which indicate potential staff development requirements will be presented and agreed
via this report. This report will not refer to any individuals by name.
11.2 The University seeks to develop a body of case-law, which will provide guidance and precedents that
may be used by Academic Misconduct Panels and Assessment Boards, in pursuit of consistent and
equitable practice. To this end, the minutes of each meeting of an Academic Misconduct Panel will
be retained. These records must be anonymous.
12.

Appendices
Appendix A- Examples of Academic Misconduct
Appendix B- Examination Rules
Appendix C- Support and guidance on Academic Writing and Study Skills
Appendix D- School Level Investigation report template
Appendix E- Guidance on the provision of Evidence
Appendix F- School Level Investigation- Academic Integrity Viva requirements and report template
Appendix G- Determining Academic Misconduct outcomes- guidance for staff
Appendix H- Communicating School level Academic Misconduct outcomes- guidance for staff
Appendix I- Tariff of Penalties: Taught provision and Postgraduate Research provision

Version:
Approved by:
Originator/Author
Policy Owner

1.3
Academic Board
Assistant Registrar (Quality Assurance)
Academic Registrar

Reference source:

Date approved:
Effective from:
Review date:

QAA Academic integrity resources (various)
Examples from other institutions used as source material (in particular Swansea University,
University of Wales Trinity St David’s, Goldsmiths, University of London, Harper Adams
University, York St John University)
13 August 2025
1 September 2025
2028/29

Target:

All Staff, All students and apprentices

Policy location:

public website

Equality impact

No direct impact. There is provision for reasonable adjustments to be made where required.
Monitoring will be undertaken to assess whether there is any differential impact in the handling of
cases

Page 11 of 29

Academic Integrity and Misconduct Policy and Procedure
Appendix A: Examples of behaviour or actions which may constitute Academic
Misconduct
The following non-exhaustive list gives examples of behaviour or actions which may constitute academic
misconduct.
Suspected academic misconduct may include allegations of inappropriate utilisation of Artificial Intelligence as
specified in the HSU AI Assessment Scale (See Course Design Framework/ Setting and Scrutiny of Assessment
Policy and Procedure)- however, the examples list will be utilised to best determine the nature of the allegation.
Assisting other students to do any of these things is also considered academic misconduct
Example

Description

Plagiarism

Plagiarism is the practice of representing another's work as one's own
without acknowledgement.

Recycling (self-plagiarism)

o

representing another person’s work (published or unpublished) as
one’s own, without acknowledgement

o

submitting whole pieces of work originally produced by another;

o

directly importing into one's work more than a single phrase from
another person's work without using quotation marks and identifying
the source;

o

making a copy of all or part of another’s work and presenting it as
one's own by failing to include the source;

o

making extensive use of another’s work, either by summarising or
paraphrasing it by changing a few words or altering the order of
presentation, without acknowledgement;

o

presenting data collected or analysed by others, without
acknowledgment;

o

the use of the words, constructs or ideas of another person without
acknowledging the source, or submitting or presenting work as one's
own which is substantially the ideas or intellectual data of another.

Re-submitting work which has already been assessed and marked
(whether in full or in part) for another assessment in the same or in a
different course, or at another institution.
In accordance with the Assessment Regulations [12.5] students who are
required to repeat or undertake reassessment and who utilise previously
submitted/aspects of previously submitted work, which was not awarded
credit, in order to rectify failure will not be in breach of the academic
offence of ‘self- plagiarism’ but will be required to ensure that they meet the
requirements of the assessment.

Collusion

Working together with other students – without official approval – and
submitting the resulting work as the work of a single student.

Contract cheating

Contract cheating is the practice of students engaging a third-party to
complete assignments. It is sometimes referred to as the use of ‘essay
mills’ and usually involves payment, but this is not the determining factor.
Contract cheating relies on someone other than the student completing an
assignment, which the student then submits as their own for
assessment/credit.

Bribery

Paying or offering inducements to another person to obtain or to attempt to
obtain an unfair advantage.

Cheating

Failing to comply with the rules or otherwise seeking to gain unfair
advantage in examinations or tests, such as:
Page 12 of 29

Example

Description
o

obtaining an advance copy of an ‘unseen’ written examination paper;

o

copying or communicating;

o

using notes or other prompts;

o

removing items of stationery or other materials from the examination
room without permission or contrary to instructions;

o

use of smart devices in examination rooms contrary to instructions;

o

asking other students about questions asked in practical/viva
examinations during the examination period; accepting information
from other students about questions asked in practical/viva
examinations during the examination period; offering other students’
information about questions asked in practical/viva examinations
during the examination period.

Fabrication

Including falsified or fabricated material or data in work submitted for
assessment.

Falsification

Falsely claiming to have completed requirements such as hours in practice
or patient numbers, false claims of exceptional personal circumstance;
falsifying signature(s) or documents related to certification or assessment.

Ghost Writing

Submitting work presented as the student's own which has been produced
in whole or part by another person on the student’s behalf, which includes
acquiring or buying material or paying another person to complete an
assignment.

Impersonation

Arranging or attempting to arrange for another person to take one's place in
an examination or practical assessment; or being a party to an
impersonation, or producing work on behalf of another student.

Third party assistance

Making use of the assistance of another such as an editor, translator or
proof-reader, in such a way as to change significantly the content,
language, meaning or significance of what is written.

Breaking examination rules

Not adhering to the rules set out in Appendix B- Examination Rules

Breaching ethical
standards

The Research Ethics Policy and Procedures applies to all staff and those
contracted by Health Sciences University (those undertaking research and
those involved in the supervision of student research), all undergraduate
(first qualification students), all postgraduate taught and research students
and all visiting staff undertaking research under the auspices and
sponsorship of Health Sciences University.
As the policy ensures appropriate consideration and ethical scrutiny of
research activities, non- compliance with the requirements of the policy
and procedure is considered Academic Misconduct.
This includes:

Publication of Misleading
information
Misrepresentation

Failing to obtain ethical approval where necessary before
carrying out research, or failing to carry out a research study as
set out in the approved ethics application
Improper or unauthorised use of data from participants in a
research study
Failure to follow accepted procedures or to exercise due care
in carrying out research in relation to research subjects
Publication of data or results known to be or believed to be misleading
Misquotation or misrepresentation of other authors

Page 13 of 29

.

Page 14 of 29

Academic Integrity and Misconduct Policy and Procedure
Appendix B: Examination Rules
Whatever form the examination takes (for example, written, practical, viva, computer-based) students must ensure
that they avoid all forms of academic misconduct/cheating and are required to adhere to these rules.
Students are not permitted to have any other person impersonate them, contribute towards or complete answers
on their behalf in any examination. Arranging, or attempting to arrange, for another person to take their place in an
examination is impersonation, and will be treated very seriously under the Academic Integrity and Misconduct
Policy and Procedure.
Students will be required to present their student ID card at all examinations or vivas as proof of identity.
Written examinations
1.

Electronic devices: The use of mobile telephones, smart watches or other electronic devices in
examination rooms is strictly forbidden. Such devices must be left in the designated place (mobile phones
turned off). If a student is found to have a mobile telephone or other electronic device in their possession
during the course of an examination, irrespective of whether it is being used, it will be regarded as an
academic offence.

2.

In most cases, a seating plan will be available outside the examination room.

3.

Students should arrive about 15 minutes before the start of the examination as it takes some time to get
all students in place and the time it takes to fill in the administrative parts of the papers is not taken out of
their examination time.

4.

If students arrive late for a written assessment they will be admitted to the assessment room without
question during the first half-hour of an assessment, although they will not be given any additional time. If
they arrive after the first half-hour they will not be admitted.

5.

As soon as students enter the examination room they must be silent and not communicate with other
students.

6.

The invigilators will ensure that nothing, apart from the student card and permitted pencils, erasers, ruler
and coloured pens (in a clear pencil case), and water (in a clear bottle) are taken into the room. All hats
and coats, bags and briefcases, books, dictionaries, revision notes, reference materials, mobile phones
and any food must be left outside the room, or in designated areas.

7.

If calculators are required for the examination they will be provided.

8.

The invigilator will remind students of the list of unauthorised items and tell them to put them outside the
room. They will tell students to place their student card on their desk; this is confirmation of their
attendance. They will instruct students in how Optical Marked Answer papers should be filled in.

9.

The invigilator will then read the following statement on behaviour during the examination:
“Cheating in this examination will void your examination script and will result in a disciplinary
investigation. Any communication to any other student in the assessment hall, or the possession, for any
reason whatsoever, of unauthorised notes or similar materials, is cheating”.

10.

The invigilator will specify the starting time and length of the examination and inform students when 30
and then 5 minutes remain. Students must start their examination only when directed. At the end of the
examination they must stop writing when told to do so.

11.

Finishing an examination early: students may not leave the examination room early in any examination
which lasts one hour or less.

12.

In any examination lasting longer than one hour students will be instructed as to when they are allowed to
leave.

13.

Once a student leaves the examination they may not return to the room (unless this is on an authorised
toilet break).

14.

Toilet breaks: If a student needs to leave the room temporarily to go to the toilet, they will need to gain
the permission of an invigilator before they do so. Only one student may take a toilet break at any one
time and they will be escorted by an invigilator. Students taking such breaks may be asked to turn out
Page 15 of 29

their pockets or otherwise confirm that they do not have a mobile device or any other inappropriate
material with them. The time at which a student leaves and returns to the room will be noted.
15.

At the end of the examination students must remain in their seats in silence while all examination
questions and answer papers are collected. No items of stationary or exam materials can be taken from
the assessment room. Students must remain silent as they leave the room.

16.

If students experience any difficulties with the conditions in an examination room (such as excessive noise)
they must bring this to the attention of the invigilator immediately. If they do not do this then the
condition in the examination room cannot subsequently be used in a claim for exceptional personal
circumstances.

Practical examinations and viva examinations
17.

Students should arrive 10 minutes before the start of the examination or when directed by their tutor.

18.

Students must bring their student card with them to the examination or viva as proof of identity.

19.

Electronic devices: The use of mobile telephones, smart watches or other electronic devices is strictly
forbidden. Such devices must be left outside the room (mobile phones turned off). If they are found to
have a mobile telephone or other electronic device in their possession during the course of an
examination, irrespective of whether it is being used, it will be regarded as an academic offence.

20.

In some cases, students may be held in a room (a ‘holding room’) while other students undertake their
practical/ viva examination. During that time students must place their turned off mobile phones/smart
watches/devices where directed. Possession of an electronic device while in the holding room, whether or
not they are seen to use the device, may be regarded as a breach of these examination rules.

21.

If a student attempts to contact another student during the practical/viva examination period it will be
considered cheating. If they receive any contact from another student during the practical/viva
examination period it will be considered cheating.

22.

The above rules regarding the use of electronic devices apply also to students acting as ‘model
patients’ for clinical practical examinations.

Page 16 of 29

Academic Integrity and Misconduct Policy and Procedure
Appendix C: Support and guidance on Academic Writing and Study Skills
This document will be provided to all students who are found to have either small mistakes or who are found
to have Poor Academic Practice.

Your recent submission was considered via the Academic Integrity and Misconduct Policy and Procedure.
The assessment was reviewed in accordance with procedure and it was determined that the assessment will NOT
be subject to further measures under the Academic Integrity and Misconduct Policy and Procedure.

Your work was either deemed to contain ‘Small Errors’ or that you had illustrated ‘Poor Academic Practice’.
•

Any Small Errors you have made will be explained in the feedback and you will be expected
to reflect on this and ensure you adapt your approach for the next assessment.

•

Poor Academic Practice will be explained to you and might include, for example, errors in
referencing, where references are provided but not using the correct format. The assessment
will be marked in accordance with the criteria (which may result in a fail). You will receive
written feedback on the assessment including how to address any shortcomings.

Your responsibility
In order to improve your academic integrity and avoid any breaches of the University regulations on academic
misconduct in the future, you should consider the following resources and understand the differences in terms.
These resources will enhance your comprehension of academic integrity and misconduct and embed a greater
understanding of good academic practice.
It is important that you review and understand the Academic Integrity and Misconduct Policy and Procedure which
outlines the definitions in use, the procedures undertaken when allegations are presented and the potential penalties
for any student who is found to have committed Academic Misconduct. These penalties include exclusion for the
most serious of cases.
Support, guidance and advice
Course team members and Personal Support Tutors can offer you feedback advice and support, and will very
often provide information to groups of students in relation to maintaining academic integrity. Your attendance and
engagement with your course is important. You should feel comfortable discussing academic integrity and
misconduct with the members of the course team or directly with your Personal Support Tutor
Student Services can offer support with developing academic skills and any student can meet with our Study
Skills tutor for an individual tutorial to help you develop the academic skills for studying at university. The tutor can
offer advice and guidance with planning and structuring your written work, preparing for presentations, and
organising your time. See the details via the HSU website.
Access the resources provided online by our Library team via the HSU website or directly via HSU LibGuides
And specifically:
Study Skills- Library
Referencing- Library

Page 17 of 29

Academic Integrity and Misconduct Policy and Procedure
Appendix D: School Level Investigation Outcome Report
This template should be utilised to record the details and the outcome of all School Level Investigations conducted
in accordance with section 7 of the Academic Integrity and Misconduct Policy and Procedure. The Word version of
this form is available on the Staff SharePoint.
The Course Leader should complete all sections below and submit this form to the Student Governance team
(studentgovernance@aecc.ac.uk ) within 3 days of the School Level Investigation meeting.
1. Core Details:
Student Name

Student
Number
Level

Course
Unit code and title
Assessment
Assessment submission date
Nature of Academic Misconduct
suspected [Please refer to Appendix
A in the policy, linked above]
DELETE Any which are not
applicable

Plagiarism
Recycling (self-plagiarism)
Collusion
Contract cheating
Bribery
Cheating
Fabrication
Falsification
Ghost Writing

Impersonation
Third party assistance
Breaking examination rules
Breaching ethical standards
Publication of Misleading
information
Misrepresentation
OTHER- Please define

Reason for Academic Misconduct
being suspected
Allegation raised by (Name and
Role)
Evidence collated to support
allegation
[list all and append to report on
submission]

2. Investigation Details:
Date of School Level Investigation
Meeting
Names and roles of all attendees
Was an Academic Integrity Viva
conducted? [Yes/No]
[If yes, ensure the Viva report is
appended to this report on
submission]

Page 18 of 29

3. OUTCOME
The School Level Investigation has found:
Tick
ONE
There is no case to answer
There is no case to answer but the student
may have made small errors in their work

Action Required
The assessment will be marked as normal
The assessment will be marked as normal and specific feedback
provided in order to ensure errors are rectified for the future.
Student is provided the Support and guidance on Academic
Writing and Study Skills document as standard.

There is evidence of Poor Academic
Practice

The assessment will be marked as normal and specific feedback
provided in order to ensure errors are rectified for the future.
Student is provided the Support and guidance on Academic
Writing and Study Skills document as standard.

There is evidence to demonstrate that a first
offence of academic misconduct of a minor
nature has occurred

Confirm application of the Penalty in section 4 below.
Specific educational requirements to be confirmed.

There is evidence to indicate that academic
misconduct of a more extensive or serious
nature, or a second (or repeated) offence,
may have occurred.

Refer to Academic Misconduct Panel

4. Penalty- Minor academic Misconduct outcomes
The following penalty will be applied as an outcome of the School Level Investigation
•

Award a mark appropriate to the work submitted (which may include a mark of zero) that excludes credit for
any words /ideas etc of other individuals that the student has presented as their own through failure to
provide appropriate acknowledgement.

•

Formal written warning will be issued outlining the misconduct and giving a warning not to repeat the action/
behaviour.
The following specific educational requirement, agreed by the School Level Investigation meeting attendees:

•

Name of Course Lead
Signed/ date
[electronic confirmation accepted]

Page 19 of 29

For Minor Misconduct- This section to be completed by the student
Please reference the Academic Integrity and Misconduct Policy and Procedure.
You are required to sign the first or second statement below to indicate whether you accept the decision of the
School-Level Investigation, or if wish the outcome to be reviewed at an Academic Misconduct Panel.
If you need support in reaching this decision you are encouraged to seek advice and guidance from the Students’
Union.
First Statement
I understand the decision of the School level meeting and agree to comply with the requirements of that decision.
Student signature: …………………………………
Date: …………………….

Second Statement
I do not accept the decision of the School level meeting and wish to request a review of this judgement at a
meeting of a University Academic Misconduct Panel.
Student signature: …………………………………
Date: …………………….
Depending on the decision indicated above the Student Governance team will either issue the written warning
or convene a Panel meeting

Page 20 of 29

Academic Integrity and Misconduct Policy and Procedure
Appendix E: Guidance on the provision of Evidence
The relevant sections of the guidance below should be utilised by course team members and students who are
asked to provide evidence and/ or statements for consideration during Academic Misconduct procedures.

Guidance for Course Teams
General guidance
The course team should attempt to ensure the evidence provided is transparent and detailed to provide a useful
overview of the suspected academic misconduct.
Evidence should be ‘frozen’ in time – online evidence can change so simply providing links isn’t sufficient.
Evidence extracted from websites should be provided either as PDF or screen-shot files.
The timing of submission of evidence is vital to ensure that procedures can be completed in accordance with the
timeline. Please endeavor to have all evidence submitted to the student governance team alongside the School
Level Investigation report.
Evidence for the School Level Investigation
Evidence considered by the School Level Investigation should be as comprehensive as possible. Suspected
academic misconduct may have come to light through a variety of means including plagiarism detection software.
Where this is the case, additional supporting evidence should be sourced to support this.
Evidence should never be solely based on plagiarism detection software.
Where it is suspected that plagiarism may have been committed it may not always be possible to find the source
document. It is important not to rely on the headline score from Turnitin for example; a small match of 3% could
be significant plagiarism, a large match of 30% could be fine in some circumstances.
Therefore evidence may include (but is not limited to) the following documentation:
• Notes from an Integrity Viva with a student
• A plagiarism detection software report (this needs to be scrutinised and not taken at face value);
• Any documentation that supports the plagiarism detection software report (e.g. details/ extracts of the
source materials);
• Excerpts of the student’s work identifying changing writing styles through the work;
• Examples of a student’s work where the writing style is different from other work already submitted;
• A similar assignment submitted by another student
• Unit handbook
• Assessment Brief
• Information relating to the student profile/ previous Academic Misconduct
Evidence for the University Academic Misconduct Panels
The following evidence will be presented as standard to all University Academic Misconduct Panels
• The School Level Investigation report and all evidence collated during this stage
• Complete annotated assessment, excluding any mark and any feedback to the student (if not already
included)
• Electronic copy of the assessment under consideration (if required)
• Any additional evidence to support the claim (e.g. website copies of source material)
• Unit handbook (if not already included)
• Assessment Brief (if not already included)
• Witness Statements (where applicable)

Page 21 of 29

Appendix E: Guidance on the provision of Evidence

Guidance for Students
General Guidance
Advice and support in relation to suspected academic misconduct can be sought from the HSU Students’ Union
or from the HSU Student Services team.
Students who are suspected of Major academic misconduct will receive at least ten working days notice of the
date of the meeting of the Academic Misconduct Panel which will consider the suspected case. This
communication will normally be made via email to the Student’s HSU email address. It is the responsibility of
students to ensure that they check their HSU email address for confirmation of dates and arrangements.
At this point students will be asked if they wish to provide a written statement in defence of the case being
considered.
Students should be aware that if they decline to submit a written statement before the Chair of the Panel confirms
that no further evidence can be presented, they cannot submit further information for consideration after the
outcome has been confirmed; neither will further evidence be considered in support of an Appeal.

Student Submission of Evidence
Students may submit any supporting evidence alongside their written statement. It is important that the
statement and any additional evidence are submitted in a timely manner prior to the Panel and in accordance
with the instructions provided. As documentation is normally circulated to all relevant attendees no later than 5
working days prior to the Panel the deadline for submission will usually be at least 7 working days prior to the
date of the Panel.
Students who wish to raise exceptional circumstances in support of their case should make reference to this
within their statement. As outlined within the Academic Integrity and Misconduct Policy and Procedure (section
8):
Neither exceptional personal circumstances nor the impact of a decision on the student’s
current work and employment will be considered grounds for excusing academic
misconduct.
However, a Panel may take such circumstances (with appropriate supporting evidence) into
account and use its discretion if the evidence demonstrates that the student’s judgement at
the time of the alleged misconduct would have been severely impaired due to these
circumstances.
It is for the Panel to decide if the exceptional personal circumstances are deemed to have severely
impaired a student’s judgement. Such circumstances may then be considered in relation to
the penalty imposed, but not to the decision on whether academic misconduct has
occurred.
In such cases students may wish to supply evidence to support the valid reason for not having submitted their
circumstances.
Students are reminded that exceptional circumstances will not be considered as grounds for excusing
academic misconduct.

Page 22 of 29

Academic Integrity and Misconduct Policy and Procedure
Appendix F: School Level Investigation- Academic Integrity Viva requirements and report
template
The School may use academic integrity vivas as part of its processes for detecting and investigating cases of
academic misconduct at the School-Level Investigation stage.
In cases where it is difficult to document the evidence of academic misconduct (such as when a student is
suspected of not having produced the work themselves – for example suspicions of contract cheating or
collusion), the Course Leader may convene an Integrity Viva to determine whether there is sufficient evidence of
academic misconduct to proceed with the allegation.
For the avoidance of doubt, vivas must only be used where documentary evidence is not available, the purpose
is not to viva students randomly to check that their work is their own.
The purpose of the academic integrity viva is to test the student’s knowledge of the work they have submitted and
provide them with the opportunity to demonstrate that the work they have submitted is their own, in advance of
any academic misconduct proceedings taking place.
The academic integrity viva will be conducted by the Course Leader and a senior member of academic staff.
It is important that the communication with the student is clear that the viva is being arranged due to suspected
academic misconduct. Communication should be formal (in writing) and copies of this communication provided as
part of the submission following the School Level Investigation.
The Course Leader would normally take responsibility for the communication, but this can be undertaken by a
nominee within the course team if necessary.
The student should be encouraged to bring with them any evidence that will help them demonstrate that the work
is their own, such as notes, drafts, etc.
The student should be given the opportunity to be accompanied by a friend or representative; this is normally
another enrolled student of the University or Students’ Union representative. Students should be encouraged to
make use of this provision. The friend or representative may not however respond to questions on behalf of the
student, unless this has specifically been agreed in advance as a reasonable adjustment
Students should be given three calendar days’ notice of the requirement to attend, and should be provided with
a specific date, time and location. Vivas may take place face to face or virtually.
If the student declines or does not attend without providing exceptional reasons with supporting evidence, the
Course Leader will summerise proceedings in the Viva report and submit this as part of the School Level
investigation report.
In the viva the Course Leader will act as Chair, confirm the purpose of the meeting and invite those present to
introduce themselves. Questions can be posed by either the Course Leader or the staff member.
The questions used in the viva should encourage the student to offer helpful clarification and elaboration of their
work, to demonstrate understanding and authorship. This is a matter of academic judgement and the questions
asked will reflect the nature of the subject, and the assessment. The student should be given the opportunity to
demonstrate that the work is their own, including the opportunity to present any evidence which they have
brought with them.
The Course Leader will be responsible for preparing a report on the viva utilising the template provided in this
appendix, and recording their conclusions on the student’s knowledge of the work which they have submitted
and the reasons for this assessment, based on their academic judgement.

Page 23 of 29

Academic Integrity and Misconduct Policy and Procedure
Appendix F: School Level Investigation- Academic Integrity Viva requirements and report
template
This template should be utilised to record the details of any Academic Integrity Viva conducted as part of the
School Level Investigation procedure as part of the Academic Integrity and Misconduct Policy and procedure. The
Word version of this form is available on the Staff SharePoint.
The Course Leader should complete all sections below and submit this form as part of the evidence in support of
the School Level Investigation report.
1. Core Details:
Student Name
Course

Student
Number
Level

Unit code and title
Assessment
Assessment submission date

Date Viva conducted
Attendees

Summary of questions and
responses

Conclusions on the student’s
knowledge of the work which
they have submitted, including
the reasons for this assessment

Name of Course Lead
Signed/ date
[electronic confirmation accepted]

Page 24 of 29

Academic Integrity and Misconduct Policy and Procedure
Appendix G: Determining outcomes: Guidance for staff involved in School Level
Investigations
The table below provides the possible outcomes of the School Level Investigation and some additional notes which
may support the decision making
Outcome

Action

a) There is no case to answer;

If there is no evidence to substantiate the claim of academic
misconduct, or if, following investigation all attendees agree that the
evidence is to the contrary, no case to answer should be agreed

b) There is no case to answer but the
student may have made small errors
in their work

The investigation may reveal that there were only very insubstantial
errors in academic writing, or potentially misunderstanding in relation
to the requirements.

c) Poor Academic Practice

Poor academic practice is defined as a lack of knowledge,
understanding and practice in academic writing and assessment
Poor Academic Practice may be defined as an outcome where the
evidence suggests that the student had no dishonest intent, where
they are new to Higher Education (e.g. level 4).
This outcome is essentially the ‘honest mistake’ and should prompt a
discussion about academic integrity and good practice.

d) Minor Misconduct

There is evidence to demonstrate that a first offence of academic
misconduct of a minor nature has occurred
Minor academic misconduct may include
• Poor referencing
• Incorrect (or an absence of) attribution for copied work inserted
in an assignment
• Paraphrasing without adequate attribution
Differentiating this from Poor Academic Practice will require the
investigators to consider the level and experience of the suspected
student, the previous assessment submissions, provision of
information and guidance etc.
Minor is only applicable to first allegations of academic misconduct.
Any student who has already had an outcome of academic
misconduct should be referred to the panel as a major case.

e) Major Misconduct

There is evidence to indicate that academic misconduct of a more
extensive or serious nature, or that is a second (or repeated) offence,
may have occurred.
All academic misconduct is considered serious and will be treated
accordingly.
However, where misconduct is found to be repeated, or compounded
by deception, or otherwise aggravated, this should be treated as
major misconduct

Page 25 of 29

Academic Integrity and Misconduct Policy and Procedure
Appendix H: Communicating School level Academic Misconduct outcomes- guidance for
staff
The table below provides the detail of the actions required following the School-level investigation Procedure.
Outcome

Staff
member

Action

a) There is no
case to
answer;

Course
Leader

All documentation relating to the case must be destroyed within 5 working
days. Notes relating to the alleged misconduct must not be produced. The
Course Leader should advise the Student Governance team that there has
been an investigation with a ‘no case to answer’ outcome.
The student’s work should be marked as normal.
If a viva has taken place the Course Leader, as Chair, should inform the
student of the outcome and that no further action will be taken.

Student
Governance
team

b) There is no
Course
case to answer Leader
but the student
may have
made small
errors in their
work

In order to maintain an audit trail, the Student Governance team will retain a
record of the number of ‘no cases to answer’ in each academic year (course,
student level, type of misconduct and what part of the process the alleged
misconduct reached i.e. School investigation or Academic Misconduct
Panel). Specific student details will not be included.
The student should be informed of this in writing by and be invited to discuss
this with an appropriate member of academic staff at the earliest possible
opportunity.
The student should be given appropriate advice as to how to prevent a
recurrence of these mistakes. Appendix C: Support and guidance on
Academic Writing and Study Skills should be provided.
A note that this has occurred should be given to the student within 5 working
days of the meeting and a copy provided to Student Governance team for
the audit trail.
In such cases, no specific penalty will be applied. The overall mark awarded
will consider normal assessment criteria

Student
Governance
team

c) Poor Academic Course
Practice
Leader

In order to maintain an audit trail, the Student Governance team will retain a
record of the number of ‘no cases to answer’ in each academic year (course,
student level, type of misconduct and what part of the process the alleged
misconduct reached i.e. School investigation or Academic Misconduct
Panel). Specific student details will not be included.
The student should be informed of this in writing by and be invited to discuss
this with an appropriate member of academic staff at the earliest possible
opportunity.
The student should be given appropriate advice as to how to prevent a
recurrence of these mistakes. Appendix C: Support and guidance on
Academic Writing and Study Skills should be provided.
A note that this has occurred should be given to the student within 5 working
days of the meeting and a copy provided to the Course Administrator for the
student file, and to Student Governance team for the audit trail.
In such cases, no specific penalty will be applied. The overall mark awarded
will consider normal assessment criteria

Student
Governance
team

The Student Governance team will retain a record of the number of ‘Poor
Academic Practice’ outcomes in each academic year (course, student level,
type of misconduct and what part of the process the alleged misconduct
reached i.e. School investigation or Academic Misconduct Panel).
Page 26 of 29

Outcome

Staff
member

Action

d) Minor
Misconduct

Course
Leader

Will advise the Student Governance team of the outcome of the School Level
Investigation within 5 working days, using the Academic Misconduct School
Level Investigation Outcome Report
For any penalty lower than withdrawal, the School-level meeting is
encouraged to incorporate an educational element relating to academic
integrity’ – for example asking the student to write a reflective piece of work
on academic integrity to demonstrate their learning

Student
Governance
team:

Will inform the student of the outcome of the investigation within 5 working
days.
The student will be advised in the communication that if they wish to dispute
the penalty they have the right to request that the case be referred to the
Academic Misconduct Panel for consideration.
The student must also be informed that advice and guidance can be
obtained from the Students’ Union.

The student: should sign and return the Academic Misconduct School Level
Investigation Outcome Report to confirm that they understand the decision
and either: accept the penalty applied, or request that the case be referred to
the Academic Misconduct Panel for consideration.
The Student Governance team will then either issue the warning or arrange
for the Academic Misconduct Panel to be convened.
e) Major
Misconduct.

Course
Leader

Where the School level meeting concludes that there is evidence to indicate
that academic misconduct of a more serious nature, or that is a second or
more) offence may have occurred, the Course Leader should use the
standard investigations template to record the outcome, and forward this to
the Student Governance team within 5 working days.
:
When an academic integrity viva has taken place the outcome of the viva will
form part of the evidence to be submitted for consideration by the Academic
Misconduct panel

The Student
Governance
team

The student will be informed that the school investigation has resulted in an
allegation of major misconduct within 5 working days of receipt of the
report.
The matter will be submitted to the Academic Misconduct Panel for
consideration in accordance with the procedural requirements outlined in
section 8 of the policy and procedure.
The student must also be informed that advice and guidance can be
obtained from the Students’ Union.

Page 27 of 29

Academic Integrity and Misconduct Policy and Procedure
Appendix I: Tariff of Penalties- Academic Misconduct Panel
When an Academic Misconduct Panel finds that Academic Misconduct has occurred, the penalty applied is
discretionary, but must be in accordance with the tariff outlined below, and also take account of the policy principles
as a general rule.
The nature and seriousness of the misconduct should be considered.
The student’s level of study and experience should be considered.
The penalty for a second or subsequent offence will normally be more severe, even if the second offence would
normally merit a lower penalty that the first offence on the student’s record.
Any mitigating or exceptional personal circumstances may be considered.
The panel may consider the severity of the impact on the specific student.
Precedents should be considered.
It is recognised that pass/fail assessments cannot necessarily incur the same penalties and it is the responsibility of
the Academic Misconduct Panel in discussion with the Secretary to adapt the penalties as necessary, to determine
the appropriate penalty to be applied in these cases.
For any penalty lower than withdrawal, Panels are encouraged to incorporate an educational element relating to
academic integrity’ – for example asking the student to write a reflective piece of work on academic integrity to
demonstrate their learning. This applies for students on either taught or research provision.

Taught degrees (undergraduate and postgraduate)
Outcome
No Case to Answer

PENALTY AVAILABLE
NONE– The Student Governance team will follow up in accordance with Appendix
H: Communicating Academic Misconduct outcomes- guidance for staff

No Case to Answer- small
errors

NONE – The Student Governance team will follow up in accordance with
Appendix H: Communicating Academic Misconduct outcomes- guidance for staff

Poor Academic Practice

NONE – The Student Governance team will follow up in accordance with
Appendix H: Communicating Academic Misconduct outcomes- guidance for staff

That academic
misconduct of a
Minor or Major
nature has
occurred
The Penalties
are listed in
order of
severity, from
most lenient to
most severe.

a)

Award a mark appropriate to the work submitted (which may include a mark of zero) that
excludes credit for any words /ideas etc of other individuals that the student has
presented as his or her own through failure to provide appropriate acknowledgement.
Issue a formal written warning outlining the misconduct and giving a warning not to
repeat the action/ behaviour. The warning will remain on the student file for the duration
of their studies, to ensure any repeated behavior is taken into consideration

b)

Mark for the piece of work in question to be capped at the pass mark,
Issue a formal written warning outlining the misconduct and giving a warning not to
repeat the action/ behaviour. The warning will remain on the student file for the duration
of their studies, to ensure any repeated behavior is taken into consideration

c)

A mark of 0% to be recorded for the element of assessment affected by the academic
misconduct. The student may be reassessed, but only in accordance with the
assessment regulations for the course. The reassessment would be capped at the pass
mark.
Page 28 of 29

Outcome

PENALTY AVAILABLE
Issue a formal written warning outlining the misconduct and giving a warning not to
repeat the action/ behaviour.
d)

A mark of 0% to be recorded for the unit affected by the academic misconduct. The
student may be reassessed, but only in accordance with the assessment regulations for
the course. The reassessment would be capped at the pass mark.
Issue a formal written warning outlining the misconduct and giving a warning not to
repeat the action/ behaviour. The warning will remain on the student file for the duration
of their studies, to ensure any repeated behavior is taken into consideration

e)

A mark of 0% to be recorded for the unit affected by the academic offence, including all
formal components contributing to the unit.
No opportunity for reassessment.
and
Repeat failed unit: The student may be allowed to repeat the unit, normally using new
piece(s) of assessment, but only in accordance with the assessment regulations for that
course and if the student’s profile permits and all opportunities have not already been
exhausted.
The mark for the repeated unit, including all formal components, will be capped at the
pass mark.
Issue a formal written warning outlining the misconduct and giving a warning not to
repeat the action/ behaviour. The warning will remain on the student file for the duration
of their studies, to ensure any repeated behavior is taken into consideration

f)

Repeat level: The student may repeat the level the following academic year, normally
using new pieces of assessment, in accordance with the assessment regulations for the
course and if the student’s profile permits and all opportunities have not already been
exhausted.
The student will have all credit stripped from their assessment record for the level
and all units within the repeated level will be capped at the pass mark. If the
student chooses not to repeat, they will be withdrawn in accordance with Option g.
Issue a formal written warning outlining the misconduct and giving a warning not to
repeat the action/ behavior. The warning will remain on the student file for the duration
of their studies, to ensure any repeated behavior is taken into consideration

g)

Withdrawal: The student may not be reassessed and is withdrawn from the course with
immediate effect. The student may be considered for the award of credit at that level in
accordance with the assessment regulations for the course. The student may also be
eligible for an intermediate award.
The student cannot transfer to any course within the University using any credit gained
nor may they be re-enrolled into the same course at a later date.

h)

Withdrawal: The student may not be reassessed and is withdrawn from the course with
immediate effect.
The student will have all credit stripped from their assessment record for the level and
previous levels and will leave the University with no credit for the course
The student will not be allowed to re-enrol on the course at a later date or on any other
course at the University

Page 29 of 29
