Academic Integrity Policy and
Academic Misconduct Procedure
Applicable from October 2025

Title: Academic Integrity Policy and Academic Misconduct Procedure
Version Issue
Revision description
Author
Approved by & date
Date
1
2
3

Sept
2023
Sept
2024
Sept
2025

Amendments to Category 1
outcome
Update to new template
Names of University services
changes to reflect new
structures

Laura
Nichols

Students and Teaching
Committee May 2023
Students and Teaching
Committee May 2024
Students and Teaching
Committee July 2025

Next
review
date
May
2024
May
2025
May
2026

Reasonable adjustment
statement updated
Change of procedure for
category 2 allegations of
academic misconduct

Policy lead

Responsible for ensuring the Policy is fit for
purpose (i.e. meets any external
regulatory/legislative requirements and internal
Ordinance/Regulation/Policy) and is reviewed
for effectiveness at stipulated intervals.
Provides assurance reporting to ‘Accountable’
person at agreed intervals. This would usually
be the Policy Author.
Administrative Accountable for ensuring the Policy is
lead
implemented effectively. Receives assurance
reporting from ‘Responsible’ person to inform
required action (if any). This would usually be
the Policy Owner.
Academic lead Accountable for ensuring the Policy is
implemented effectively. Receives assurance
reporting from ‘Responsible’ person to inform
required action (if any). This would usually be
the Policy Owner.
Internal
Consulted when the Policy is reviewed with
services
actions implemented.
involved in
(This should involve all end-users of the Policy
authorship &
to seek feedback and ensure continuous
implementation improvement).
Related
Refer to all procedures and guidance that
University
directly link to policy implementation.
regulations,
policies &
Include links to policies and procedure which
procedures
may interlink
Policy impact
assessment
date
Data
protection
impact
assessment
date

Rebecca Barnes
Executive Director of Academic
Registry

Rebecca Barnes

Pro-Vice Chancellor – Andrew
Ireland

Academic Registry

Academic Regulations
Research Degree Regulations
Examination Procedures
Fitness to Practise Procedure
Policy on Misconduct in Research
Academic Appeals Procedure

Equality Impact Assessment (EIA)

Information Governance - Home

Terminology
Compliance with policy is mandatory, unless otherwise indicated. The following section defines the use
of language to denote what is mandatory, versus what is advisory.
Must
a requirement, which applies in all circumstances, at all times
Should
a recommendation, to be met on a ‘comply or explain’ basis. This would typically
be used in conjunction with an adverb (e.g. ‘normally’ or ‘usually’), with an
explanation as to what exceptions might be permissible.
Can
both capability and possibility

Is/are

used for a description

Academic Integrity Policy and Academic Misconduct Procedure
1. Policy Statement
1.1. Academic integrity is defined as upholding honest and truthful standards of
academic behaviour and is a fundamental principle within the University of
Lancashire, strongly linked to good academic practice. This Academic Integrity
Policy and Academic Misconduct Procedure (referred to throughout this document
as the ‘Policy’) set out the University’s approach to maintaining the academic
integrity of students’ work, and the steps the University will take in suspected cases
of academic misconduct.
1.2. The University adopts a strategic approach to the prevention and management
of academic misconduct. This is cognisant of the University’s strategies for Learning
and Teaching and Research. The University advocates a holistic approach and
fosters a culture of academic and research integrity amongst staff and students by
providing a coherent set of Academic Regulations and Research Degree Regulations
and guidelines for implementation by Schools and Services.
1.3. The University recognises that all academic and professional services staff,
holding a variety of roles, have the responsibility to promote a culture of academic
and research integrity, acting as role models for students and their peers.
1.4. Student support, advice and guidance will be provided within Schools and by
central University services to facilitate student personal and professional
development, with an emphasis on information literacy, study skills and problem
solving.
1.5. Importance is placed on providing education for staff and students and raising
awareness of the importance of academic integrity. Students will be expected to
develop sound academic practice throughout the duration of their studies at the
University. Education about what constitutes academic misconduct, its
consequences and how to achieve sound academic practice will be provided for all
students, across all courses at all levels. The use of Turnitin is promoted as both an
education and detection tool, together with a range of deterrents.

1.6. Course teams are responsible for ‘designing out’ the potential for academic
misconduct by implementing robust procedures for curriculum design, student
recruitment, course delivery, assessment and evaluation and through continuous
enhancement.
1.7. Standards and behaviour expected of students will be made explicit to students,
including standards of proficiency and competencies required by Professional,
Statutory and Regulatory Bodies and Research Council Codes of Practice, in a range
of verbal communications, written and electronic resources.
1.8. Schools are responsible for investigating suspected cases of academic
misconduct and imposing penalties determined by circumstances and evidence
presented in accordance with the Academic Regulations and Research Degree
Regulations. Schools will monitor the occurrence of academic misconduct utilising
standardised templates which will be reported centrally to the relevant subcommittee of Academic Board. Incidents will be systematically collated and School
action plans focusing on improvements will be monitored.
1.9. The following table summarises the commitments by staff and students to
promote academic integrity and eliminate academic misconduct:
Schools will:

Students will:

Design assessments which are engaging,
relevant and minimise the potential for
academic misconduct.

Engage with all assessments in a timely,
honest and professional manner.

Deliver assessment schedules and
information in a timely and effective
manner.

Use best efforts to meet assessment
deadlines and be familiar with the
guidance on referencing, proof-reading
and ethics relevant to their discipline area.

Support students from all backgrounds to
achieve sound academic practice across
courses at all levels.

Engage positively with the range of
support that is available from Schools and
central Services including WISER
academic skills support.

Provide information and education about
what constitutes academic misconduct
and its consequences.

Understand what constitutes academic
misconduct and how it can be avoided by
using effective referencing and citation
practices.

Promote the use of Turnitin and other
technologies as an education and
detection tool.

Make use of Turnitin as an education and
detection tool.

Investigate suspected cases of academic
misconduct in a fair and timely manner.

Engage positively with any investigation,
including retaining and providing copies
of drafts of assessed work.

Monitor cases of academic misconduct
and develop action plans focusing on
improvements.

Take steps to secure their work, hardware,
software, laptops, data etc from improper
use by others.

2. Scope/Application of the Policy
2.1. This Policy applies to all students, including members of staff who are registered
as students for a University award, from enrolment to award or exit from the
University, including those studying at a partner institution in the UK or overseas. It
applies to all taught courses and postgraduate research degrees, professional
doctorates, professional awards and apprenticeships.
2.2
If a student withdraws from the University part way through an academic
misconduct process under this Policy, the University has the right to continue that
process, or where suspected academic misconduct is discovered after a student
has left, to hear that process in full and reach a conclusion. The outcome would be
considered if the student applied to return for further study.
2.3. This Policy applies to the preparation and presentation of all forms of assessed
work including without limitation: written and oral examinations and other timeconstrained assessments, coursework, essays, assignments, projects, dissertations,
theses, presentations, practical work, placement or field trip reports and the
production of artefacts.
2.4. This Policy should be read in conjunction with the Academic Regulations which
set out the regulations governing academic misconduct and the Examination
Procedures for taught and research programmes.
2.5. Where students on professionally regulated courses and/or who are
professional registrants are found to have engaged in academic misconduct under
this Policy, the matter will be referred to the Dean of School to consider whether
further action is required in accordance with the Fitness to Practise Procedure
and/or the relevant professional body guidance.
2.6. Allegations of research misconduct (e.g. fabrication, falsification or
misrepresentation of data or contravention of ethical principles) will normally be

considered in the first instance under the Policy on Misconduct in Research. The
case may subsequently be referred to the Academic Misconduct Committee for
consideration.
2.7. Where evidence of academic misconduct becomes apparent after the
recommendation of the Assessment Board or Research Degrees Board, the matter
will be investigated and the original decision may be set aside if appropriate.
2.8. Where academic misconduct is proven, the University reserves the right to
investigate previously marked work and take action in line with this Policy.
2.9. Where academic misconduct is established after an award has been conferred,
the Assessment Board may recommend that the award be rescinded in accordance
with the Academic Regulations.
3. Academic Misconduct Procedure
3.1. Assessment is the means by which the University tests whether a student has
achieved the learning outcomes of their course and the standards of an award. It is a
fundamental principle that students are assessed fairly and on equal terms.
3.2. Material submitted for assessment in any form must be the student's own work.
Students must produce work for assessment and engage in examinations in a timely,
honest and professional manner, and without attempting to gain an unfair
advantage.
3.3. Students are bound by the Academic Regulations and are expected to
familiarise themselves with these and also the guidance on referencing and proofreading provided during their course, and ethical policies relevant to their discipline
as appropriate. Students must retain draft copies of work used in the preparation of
final submissions to help prove the work is their own, if challenged.
3.4. The University regards all cases of academic misconduct seriously and penalties
will be imposed where academic misconduct is proven. Students should be aware
that a record of academic misconduct may have significant academic and
professional consequences. Students can be excluded from the University for very
serious or repeat offences.
4. Principles

4.1. Academic Integrity Leads and Academic Misconduct Committees have
authority on behalf of the Academic Board to impose penalties for academic
misconduct.
4.2. Students will have the opportunity to provide an explanation for their actions
during an interview with the Academic Integrity Lead or Academic Misconduct
Committee.
4.3. Where students experience circumstances which affect their performance,
there are University procedures for students to apply for mitigating circumstances,
and such cases will be treated in a supportive and appropriate way. Given the
existence of these procedures, mitigating circumstances should not be considered
in deciding whether academic misconduct has taken place, and may only be
considered in determining the level of penalty where there is evidence of
compelling personal circumstances which impaired the student’s judgement.
4.4. Where academic misconduct is suspected, an Assessment Board or Research
Degrees Board shall not determine the student’s assessment result until the facts
have been established and the case has been concluded. The assessment and/or
research in question may be suspended as an interim measure pending the outcome
of this Policy.
4.5. The University will aim to deal with suspected cases of academic misconduct
within 25 working days from the date when the marks are released. In exceptional
cases, where it becomes clear that the investigation is likely to be complex, variation
of the timescale and the reasons for this will be notified to the student.
4.6. Interviews and hearings may be conducted remotely via Microsoft Teams or in
person at any University campus or partner institution. Students will be asked to
present their University ID card.
4.7. Confidentiality will be preserved during the investigation of an allegation of
academic misconduct to protect the interests of everyone concerned, unless
disclosure is necessary to progress the investigation in line with the rules of natural
justice. The University expects that all parties will respect the confidentiality of the
process.
4.8.
All references in this Policy to a named post-holder include their appointed
nominee.

5. Support for Students
5.1. Students who are suspected of engaging in academic misconduct under this
Policy are strongly encouraged to seek independent advice and support from the
Students’ Union Advice and Representation Centre.
5.2. At all stages of this Policy, a student is entitled to be accompanied by a person
of their choosing, who may be from the Students’ Union Advice and Representation
Centre. Any person accompanying the student at any stage in this Policy is there in
a supporting capacity. The name and designation of any supporting person must be
given to the Student Casework Team 48 hours before any meeting/hearing.
5.3. This Policy is intended to be fair and to comply with the rules of natural justice.
It is not a formal court process and, therefore, should not be adversarial or overly
legalistic, and there is no need for anyone to have formal legal representation. A
student may be accompanied by a person who is legally qualified, providing that
person understands and respects the nature of the meeting/hearing and does not
adopt an overly adversarial or legalistic stance.
5.4. Other support is available from Student Services in relation to student
wellbeing, and from Student Achievement Services in relation to overcoming poor
academic practice and developing study skills.
6. Reasonable Adjustments
6.1. Where a student has declared a disability, the University will ensure that
information about this Policy is available in appropriate formats, and that reasonable
adjustments are made to the proceedings to accommodate their needs.
7. Identifying Academic Misconduct
7.1. The method of detection will depend on the nature and form of the assessed
work.
7.2. Academic judgment will be applied based on the evidence that is available when
identifying suspected cases of academic misconduct. It is not necessary for intent
to be proven in determining whether an offence of academic misconduct has
occurred. It is sufficient that a particular act or omission has occurred.
7.3. Students’ work may be submitted electronically to Turnitin UK which is a webbased system that provides comprehensive checking of submitted work for

matching text on web pages, electronic journals and previously submitted student
work. Turnitin UK generates an Originality Report to facilitate the identification of
potential plagiarism cases. The Originality Report can be used as evidence and to
support the related decision-making process.
8. Academic Judgment
8.1. Academic judgment will be applied in:
•

•

interpreting detection software reports, where the substance of the copied
material will be considered as well as the quantity, and there is no
percentage threshold for an investigation to be initiated; and
determining the nature and severity of the matter and whether poor
academic practice, academic misconduct or gross academic misconduct has
occurred.

9. Standard of Proof
9.1. The University will decide whether an allegation of academic misconduct is
proven based on the evidence presented during the meeting/hearing. The standard
of proof will be the civil standard of proof which means that ‘on a balance of
probabilities’ the facts of the allegation are more likely than not to have happened.
10. Poor Academic Practice
10.1. Poor academic practice falls short of academic misconduct and normally
occurs where a student has attempted but failed to adopt good academic practice.
It is normally the result of a failure to understand the required protocols and is most
likely to occur at an early stage in the course and form a relatively small part of the
student’s assessed work.
10.2. Examples of poor academic practice include inadequate referencing, omitting
to include quotation marks or gaps in the reference list. The University will apply
academic judgment in determining whether poor academic practice or academic
misconduct has occurred.
11. Definitions of Academic Misconduct
11.1. Academic misconduct is defined as any action or attempted action by a student
which gives or has the potential to give an unfair advantage in an assessment, or
might assist another student to gain an unfair advantage, or otherwise undermines

the academic integrity of the University. Academic misconduct includes the
following without limitation:
11.2. Cheating is defined a form of examination malpractice relating to formal
invigilated examinations or other assessments. Examples of cheating include
without limitation:
• communicating with another candidate during an examination
• communicating with any other person other than an authorised invigilator or
other member of staff during an examination
• copying or attempting to copy from another candidate during an
examination
• possession of any written or printed materials during an examination, unless
expressly permitted by the examination regulations
• possession of any electronically stored information or accessing any
information via a network during an examination, unless expressly permitted
by the examination regulations
• use of any information, communication, technology device e.g. mobile
phone, watch or calculator during an examination, unless expressly permitted
by the examination regulations
• substitution of examination materials
• impersonation e.g. where a student arranges for someone else to
impersonate them or impersonates another person in an examination, test or
hearing
• gaining or attempting to gain access to unauthorised assessment materials
in advance of the specified time, unless expressly permitted by the
examination regulations
• obtaining a copy of a written examination paper in advance of the date and
time for its authorised release.
11.3. Plagiarism occurs where a student copies words or ideas from another person
and presents those words or ideas as their own in an assessment without properly
acknowledging and citing the source(s). Examples of plagiarism include, without
limitation:
• the inclusion in a student’s work of another’s work whether published or not
without proper acknowledgment
• the substantial summarising of another’s work without proper
acknowledgment
• the substantial and unauthorised use of the ideas of another person without
proper acknowledgment

11.4. Re-presentation of work occurs where a student submits the same work in full
or in part that they have previously submitted for academic credit, where this is not
expressly permitted by the assessment brief.
11.5. Collusion is an attempt to deceive the examiners by disguising the true
authorship of an assessed piece of work in full or in part. Example of collusion
include without limitation:
• Where student A copies, or imitated in close detail, student B’s work
• Where two or more students divide the elements of an assignment among
themselves and copy, or imitate in close detail, one another’s answers.
11.5.1. All students involved will be regarded as jointly responsible in cases of
collusion. It is also an offence of collusion to allow one’s work to be copied or
imitated in close detail. Students should take reasonable steps to safeguard their
work, data and hardware from improper use by others.
11.5.2. Collusion should not be confused with the normal situation in which students
learn from one another, sharing ideas, as they generate the knowledge and
understanding necessary for each of them successfully and independently to
undertake an assignment or research project. Nor should it be confused with group
work on an assignment or research project where this is specifically authorised.
11.6 Unauthorised Use of Technology
Academic misconduct will occur where a student uses technological aids and/or
Artificial Intelligence (AI) to gain an unfair advantage in meeting the assessment
learning outcomes. This can include, but is not limited to:
• Generating an assessment in its entirety and submitting it as the student’s
own work.
• Substantial or significant portions of the work submitted are produced by
generative AI and therefore no longer reflect the student’s own
understandings, thoughts or ideas.
• Uploading an assessment to be automatically rewritten or translated, so that
the submitted assessment does not reflect the student’s own
understandings, thoughts or ideas.
• Failing to prevent built-in/preinstalled generative AI applications from
producing substantial or significant portions of an assessment, which
therefore do not reflect the student’s own understandings, thoughts or
ideas.
• Failing to acknowledge/reference any permitted use of AI within an
assessment.

•
•

•

Failing to follow specific instructions relating to the use of AI within the
assessment brief, except for documented inclusive support adjustments.
Unauthorised use of any other technological aid, such as translation
software, paraphrasing tools, essay bots and generated of graphics or
artwork, unless otherwise stated in the assessment brief.
Attempting to use AI to humanise or attempt to hide the use of AI so that
the submitted assessment does not reflect the student’s own
understandings, thoughts or ideas.

To avoid breaching the academic misconduct regulations, students should:
• Ensure any work submitted reflects their own understandings, thoughts and
ideas.
• Be prepared to discuss their assessment with their tutor.
• Acknowledge any use of GenAI in their work with appropriate referencing.
Record how GenAI tools have been used by including screenshots of
examples of the prompts used, and the output generated in your assignment
coversheet.
• Keep drafts of work to evidence their thinking and the development of their
submission.
If a student is in any doubt about what is considered acceptable usage of AI within a
particular assessment, they should seek guidance from their module leader.
Additionally, more general advice and support in achieving sound academic practice
and avoiding academic misconduct, can be provided by:
• The module and course leaders
• Their personal tutor
• Students Union Advice and Representation Centre.
11.7. Commissioning of Assessed Work occurs where a student commissions a third
party to complete all or part of an assessed piece of work and then submits it as
their own. Commissioned work may be pre-written or specifically prepared for the
student. It might be obtained from a company or an individual and may or may not
involve a financial transaction. It includes the use of essay mills or buying work online or the use of a proof-reading service that includes re-writing the original
assessed piece of work.
11.7.1. Where it is suspected that a student has submitted work that has not been
written by them, the student may be asked questions about the work during an
interview with the Academic Integrity Officer or Academic Misconduct Committee
to give them the opportunity to demonstrate appropriate knowledge of the subject

matter and that they understand the content of the work. Students must keep
copies of drafts and other materials used in researching and preparing their work.
11.8. Falsification occurs where data, evidence or experimental results are altered or
enhanced. Fabrication occurs where a student creates data, results or other outputs
and presents them as if they were real.
11.9. Ethical Breaches may occur where there is a failure to comply with University
and School research and ethics policies and procedures, including conducting
research and data collection without prior ethical approval from the University.
Students should ensure that they are familiar with the ethical policies of the
University and their discipline area.
11.10. Any Other Attempt to Deceive includes offering a bribe to any member of
staff or external person who is connected to the University in an attempt to gain an
unfair advantage in an assessment.
12. Roles and Responsibilities
12.1. Each Dean of School will appoint an Academic Integrity Lead and one or more
Deputy Academic Integrity Lead(s) in order to ensure a consistent approach to the
promotion of academic integrity within the School and the detection and
investigation of cases of academic misconduct.
12.2. The role of the Academic Integrity Lead is to:
• provide advice and guidance to staff on academic integrity-related issues
• decide the level at which each case should be managed and when cases
should be referred to the Academic Misconduct Committee
• manage the Category 2 and 3 processes
• monitor the occurrence of academic misconduct within the School and
report on this to Academic Registry
• create action plans for the School focusing on improvements
• assist with the delivery of staff development on academic integrity-related
issues.
12.3. One or more Deputy Academic Integrity Lead(s) will support the Academic
Integrity Lead in dealing with cases within the School, including any cases where the
Academic Integrity Lead has been involved in the teaching, supervision or
assessment of the student concerned.

12.4. Training will be provided for all new and continuing Academic Integrity Leads
and Deputy Academic Integrity Leads.
13. Academic Misconduct Committee
13.1. The membership of the Academic Misconduct Committee (the Committee) will
normally comprise as a minimum:
• Dean of School who will act as Chair
• One member of staff from the School (who will normally be an Associate
Dean or Principal Lecturer)
• An elected officer of the Students’ Union
13.2. The Committee may co-opt additional members in complex cases or where
specialist expertise is required. In the case of a PGR degree, the Committee shall
also include the Chair of the Research Degrees Board.
13.3. No members of the Committee will have been involved in the teaching,
supervision or assessment of the student concerned.
14. Procedure following an Allegation of Academic Misconduct
14.1. Any member of staff or examiner (internal or external) who has cause to
suspect that academic misconduct has occurred at the point of submission or
preparation of an assessment should report the case to the relevant Academic
Integrity Lead and provide any evidence to support the allegation.
14.2. Where academic misconduct is identified during any taught or research degree
examination, the matter should be reported to the Academic Registry in the first
instance, who will refer the matter to the appropriate Academic Integrity Lead for
consideration.
14.3. The Academic Integrity Lead will review the evidence and may conduct an
initial investigation which may involve interviewing the student. The Academic
Integrity Lead will consult with the Deputy Academic Integrity Lead and/or relevant
staff to decide whether there is a case to answer and, if so, how it should be
managed in line with one of the following categories. Academic judgment will be
applied in determining whether poor academic practice or academic misconduct
may have occurred. The Academic Integrity Lead will check the student’s record to
determine whether there are any previous findings of academic misconduct on
record.

14.4. Cases within Category 1 will be dealt with by the module leader. The Academic
Integrity Lead will deal with cases within Categories 2 and 3. For other cases
including potential Category 4 cases of gross academic misconduct, the Academic
Integrity Lead will refer the case to the Academic Misconduct Committee for
consideration.
15. Categories of Academic Misconduct
15.1 Category 1: Poor Academic Practice
This covers a range of poor academic practices (see definition in section 10).
Examples of poor academic practice include, without limitation:
• inadequate referencing
• omitting quotation marks
15.2. Category 2: Academic Misconduct
Category 2 academic misconduct will normally be defined as a first instance of
academic misconduct. Where there is evidence of academic misconduct in multiple
assignments that were submitted at the same time within the same cycle of
assessment(s), this will normally be treated as a single occurrence. Examples of
Category 2 academic misconduct include, without limitation:
• Plagiarism
• Re-presentation of work
• Collusion
• Cheating/examination malpractice
• Repeat instances of poor academic practice
15.3. Category 3: Academic Misconduct
Category 3 academic misconduct will normally be defined as a repeat offence of
academic misconduct in any form, where the student has previously incurred a
penalty and a warning for academic misconduct, and where the repeat instance
occurs in a subsequent cycle of assessment(s). Examples of Category 3 academic
misconduct include, without limitation:
•
•

Repeat instances of Category 2 academic misconduct in any form
Cheating/examination malpractice

15.4. Category 4: Gross Academic Misconduct
Category 4 will normally be defined as gross academic misconduct where a clear
intent to deceive and gain an unfair academic advantage can be established.
Examples of Category 4 gross academic misconduct include, without limitation:

•
•
•
•

A repeat instance of Category 3 academic misconduct in any form
Impersonation
Commissioning of assessed work
Fabrication or falsification of data

16. Development Engagement (Category 1)
16.1. Where poor academic practice is identified, the student will be invited to a
meeting with a member of staff (usually the module leader) who will explain the
nature of the concern.
16.2. This will be a formative learning opportunity for the student who will be given
advice and will be referred to relevant support and educational opportunities
regarding good academic practice. The student may be required to undertake an
online academic integrity learning activity.
16.3. The outcome will be determined via the standard marking processes, and the
mark for the element of assessment may be reduced (by 10% of the maximum mark)
to reflect the failure to address the assessment criteria regarding referencing. This
will be determined by the module leader and ratified by the Module Assessment
Board.
16.4. The student will be informed that if poor academic practice occurs in the
future, it will be dealt with by a formal meeting with the Academic Integrity Lead
and associated penalties will be imposed.
16.5. The member of staff will complete a record of the meeting using a standard
form which will outline the advice given and will be signed by the student and the
member of staff. A copy will be given to the student. A record will be retained on
the Starfish system for the purposes of taking appropriate action if further instances
occur, although this will not form part of the formal student record.

17. Academic Integrity Lead (Category 2 and 3)
17.1. The Academic Integrity Lead will consider all Category 2 and 3 academic
misconduct cases. The Academic Integrity Lead will consider the evidence and may
consult with relevant staff, to decide whether there is a case to answer and, if so,
how it should be managed. As part of this process, the student record will be
checked to determine whether there are any previous findings of academic
misconduct.

17.2. For Category 2 allegations, the Academic Integrity Lead will assess the
allegation and relevant evidence, including:
• evidence presented by the academic referrer or course lead
• the student’s written statement/response
Further information or evidence from the academic referrer or the student may be
requested.
17.3. The student will be notified of the allegation against them and will be asked to
submit a written response, which gives the student the opportunity to establish to
the University’s satisfaction that the work is their own.
17.4. Students may seek independent support in submitting a written response to
the allegation, such as from the Students’ Union Advice and Representations
Centre.
17.5. The Academic Integrity Lead will make a decision on the evidence presented
based on a balance of probabilities and a written outcome will be sent to the
student (see below).
17.6. The student may request a meeting with the Academic Integrity Lead should
they disagree with the outcome, which will be conducted in accordance with the
procedure for Category 3 allegations set out below.
17.7. For Category 3 allegations, the student will be invited to attend a meeting with
the Academic Integrity Lead to discuss the alleged case of academic misconduct.
The purpose of the meeting will be to give the student the opportunity to establish
to the University’s satisfaction that the work is their own.
17.8. The student will be given at least 5 working days’ notice of the time, date and
place of the meeting. The following information will be included with the notice:
•
•
•
•

the grounds on which the alleged academic misconduct is believed to have
occurred
a copy of the Originality Report or other evidence to be referred to in the
meeting
the right to seek advice from the Students’ Union Advice and Representation
Centre
the right to be accompanied by a friend or member of the Students’ Union
Advice and Representation Centre.

17.9. For Category 3 allegations, the Course Leader (or nominee) or Chief
Examination Invigilator may be present at the meeting to explain the allegation in
detail. A member of staff from the Student Casework Team will be in attendance to
advise on the process and take a record of the meeting using a standard report
template.
17.10. For Category 3 allegations if the student does not attend the meeting without
good cause, a decision may be made in their absence and a penalty may be imposed
(see below).
17.11. In suspected cases of collusion, the Academic Integrity Lead will hold
individual meetings with all parties involved.
17.12. The Academic Integrity Lead may:
•
•

ask the student to provide evidence that shows how they prepared for and
wrote the assessed work e.g. copies of drafts or notes; and/or
ask questions about the submitted work during the meeting to give the
student the opportunity to demonstrate appropriate knowledge of the
subject matter and that they understand the content of the work.

17.13. The Academic Integrity Lead will:
•
•
•

•
•
•

determine the facts of the case on the basis of the evidence before them
consider any explanation given by the student
decide on the balance of probabilities whether academic misconduct has
occurred (or refer the case to an Academic Misconduct Committee where it
is believed that Category 4 gross academic misconduct may have occurred)
consider any aggravating factors e.g. any previous finding of academic
misconduct
confirm the penalty in cases where it is established that Category 2 or 3
academic misconduct has occurred (see below).
refer the case to an Academic Misconduct Committee where it is believed
that Category 4 gross academic misconduct has occurred.

17. 14. Written notification of the outcome and the associated reasons will be sent
to the student within 5 working days of the decision. If the student has met the
Academic Integrity Lead (for Category 2 by request or Category 3 by requirement)
the student will normally be notified verbally of the outcome and the associated
reasons at the end of the meeting. The outcome letter will identify the evidence
considered, the Academic Regulations applied, the decision on the outcome and the
penalty and associated reasons, and the student’s right of appeal.

17.15. The Academic Integrity Lead will report the outcome to the Assessment Board
or Research Degrees Board.
18. Referral to an Academic Misconduct Committee (Category 4)
18.1. An Academic Misconduct Committee will be convened where:
a) The Academic Integrity Lead considers that there is a suspected case of
Category 4 gross academic misconduct; or
b) A case is referred from the University’s Policy on Research Misconduct.
18.2. The Academic Integrity Lead or Research Misconduct Committee will prepare a
written report explaining the nature of the alleged offence and provide supporting
evidence. The report will state why the alleged offence is considered to be gross
academic misconduct including why there is considered to have been a deliberate
attempt to deceive and gain an unfair advantage.
18.3. The student will be invited to a hearing with the Academic Misconduct
Committee. The purpose of the hearing will be to give the student the opportunity
to put their case, and to establish to the University’s satisfaction, that the work is
their own.
18.4. The Academic Misconduct Committee may:
•
•

ask the student to provide evidence that shows how they prepared for and
wrote the assessed work e.g. copies of drafts or notes; and/or
ask questions about the submitted work during the hearing to give the
student the opportunity to demonstrate knowledge of the subject matter
and that they understand the content of the work.

18.5. The student will be given at least 5 working days’ notice of the time, date and
place of the hearing. The following information will be included with the notice:
•
•
•
•
•

the grounds on which the alleged misconduct is believed to have occurred
a copy of the report prepared by the Academic Integrity Lead or Research
Misconduct Committee and any supporting evidence
the right to seek advice from the Students’ Union Advice and Representation
Centre
the right to be accompanied by a friend or member of the Students’ Union
Advice and Representation Centre
the right to call witnesses and give evidence.

18.6. The student will be asked to submit a written statement in response to the
allegation together with any evidence e.g. copies of drafts or notes.
18.7. The Academic Integrity Lead and/or Course Leader and/or Chair of the
Research Misconduct Committee will normally be present to explain the allegation
in detail. A member of the Student Casework Team will be in attendance to advise
on the process and take a formal record of the meeting using standard report
template.
18.8. If the student does not attend without good cause, a decision may be made in
their absence and a penalty may be imposed (see below).
18.9. The order of proceedings at the hearing will normally be as follows:
•
•
•

•
•
•

•
•
•
•
•

•

The Academic Misconduct Committee will convene in private session to
discuss the case and what questions need to be asked.
The student and any representative and the presenting member(s) of staff
will attend the hearing at the same time.
The Chair will invite all those present to introduce themselves and their role
in the proceedings and will explain the purpose and structure of the hearing
and the possible outcomes.
The Chair will invite the presenting member(s) of staff to present the case.
The Committee and the student (or representative) may ask questions.
The Chair will invite the student (or representative) to explain the
circumstances surrounding the alleged academic misconduct from their
perspective and respond to the allegation of academic misconduct.
The Committee and the presenting member(s) of staff may ask questions.
Any witnesses called by the presenting member(s) of staff or the student
may be called at this point, where previously agreed by the Chair.
The presenting member(s) of staff will be invited to sum up.
The student (or representative) will be invited to give an explanation and to
sum up their case.
Once the Chair is satisfied that all questioning is completed, all parties apart
from the Committee and the member of the Student Casework Team will
withdraw.
The Committee will deliberate to reach a decision, and may seek further
information and/or adjourn to a later date.

18.10. The Academic Misconduct Committee will:
•
•

determine the facts of the case based on the evidence before it
consider any explanation given by the student

•
•
•

decide on the balance of probabilities whether academic misconduct has
occurred and its severity
consider any aggravating factors e.g. whether it is a repeat offence
confirm the penalty where it is established that academic misconduct or
gross academic misconduct has occurred.

18.11. The student will normally be notified verbally of the outcome and the
associated reasons at the end of the hearing. Written notification of the outcome
and associated reasons will normally be sent to the student along with a record of
the hearing within 5 working days of the hearing. The outcome letter will identify the
Academic Regulations applied, the evidence considered, the decision on the
outcome and the penalty and the associated reasons, and the student’s right of
appeal.
18.12. The Chair will ensure that all cases are formally recorded using a standard
report template and reported to the Assessment Board or Research Degrees board.
19. Penalties for Academic Misconduct
19.1. The penalties for academic misconduct will be determined based on:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

the severity of the case
the circumstances of the case
the level at which the offence took place
what stage of the course the student is at
whether it was a repeat offence
any explanation given by the student
the extent to which a clear intent to deceive and gain an unfair academic
advantage has been established.

19.2. Academic Penalties for Taught Awards
Category

Penalty

Cat. 1

The outcomes will be determined via the standard marking processes. The
element of assessment will be marked and the mark may be reduced (by
10% of the maximum mark) to reflect the failure to address the
assessment criteria regarding referencing.
The student will be given advice and will be referred to relevant support
and learning opportunities regarding good academic practice.

Cat. 2

A mark of 0% for the element of assessment which must be resubmitted
where permitted*, to the required standard. The mark for the element of
assessment following resubmission will be capped at the minimum pass
mark.
Or
A mark of 0% for the element of assessment which must be resubmitted
where permitted*, to the required standard. The mark for the module
following resubmission will be capped at the minimum pass mark.
Plus
A written warning setting out the consequences of further academic
misconduct and a referral to learning opportunities regarding good
academic practice. A flag will be placed on the student record system.

Cat. 3

A mark of 0% for the module with no opportunity for re-assessment. The
student may be permitted to retake the module in a subsequent year
when the module result will be capped at the pass mark for the module.
Plus
A final written warning setting out the consequences of further academic
misconduct and a referral to learning opportunities regarding good
academic practice.
A flag will be place on the student record system.

Cat. 4

Level failed and a requirement to withdraw from the programme. (This
does not preclude the student from applying for re-admission to the
University after a period of time defined by the Committee.)
Or
Expulsion from the University on a permanent basis. The Academic
Misconduct Committee will advise the Assessment Board regarding the
student’s entitlement to any exit award or credit achieved. The student will
normally be entitled to retain an exit award or any credits awarded for
work that has already been passed without evidence of academic
misconduct.
A flag will be placed on the student record system.

*Where academic misconduct is detected for the first time on a reassessment for
an already failed assessment, no further reassessment will be permitted and the
appropriate fail grade will be conferred.
The above penalties will apply where a student transfers from one University of
Lancashire course to another during their period of studies and module credits
gained on the former course are transferred to the current course.
19.3. Academic Penalties for Postgraduate Research Degrees
Category

Penalty

Cat. 2

In the event of a single offence of academic misconduct at any point in
the postgraduate research student journey, including registration,
transfer, annual progression or examination, the following penalties may
be imposed:
• referral for reassessment with or without a further viva, where a
viva formed part of the original assessment strategy
• that the maximum level of award be defined as MPhil, where a
student is seeking registration or is registered for a PhD
• failure of the award.

Where the outcome states that the maximum level of award should be
MPhil, the examination process must be completed to ensure the student
meets the criteria for the award of MPhil.
Cat. 3&4

In the event of a repeat offence of academic misconduct on the same
research degree (irrespective of whether the repeat offence involves the
same form of academic misconduct), the appropriate penalty should be
failure of the degree or expulsion, depending on the severity of the case.

19.4 Explanatory Circumstances
5.1 Students will have the opportunity to provide an explanation for their actions
during an interview with the Academic Integrity Lead or Academic Misconduct
Committee. Any explanation will not be relevant to deciding whether academic
misconduct has occurred but may be taken into account when deciding on the
penalty.

5.2 Where students experience circumstances which affect their performance, there
are University procedures for students to apply for mitigating circumstances, and
such cases will be treated in a supportive and appropriate way. Given the existence
of these procedures, mitigating circumstances should not be considered in deciding
whether academic misconduct has taken place, and may only be considered in
determining the level of penalty where there is evidence of compelling personal
circumstances which impaired the student’s judgement.
20. Appeal
20.1. The student may submit an appeal within 10 working days of the official
notification of the outcome of a decision by the Academic Integrity Lead or the
Academic Misconduct Committee in line with the Academic Appeals Procedure.
20.2. Appeals against decisions on academic misconduct will only be valid if they are
based on one or more of the following grounds:
I.
II.

that the original meeting/hearing was not conducted fairly and/or in
accordance with the published procedure
that the original decision was manifestly unreasonable in all the
circumstances.

20.3. An appeal against a decision by an Academic Misconduct Committee in a
Category 4 case of academic misconduct will proceed directly to the second stage
of the Academic Appeals Procedure to be considered by an Appeals Panel.
20.4. Students may seek independent advice regarding an appeal from the
Students’ Union Advice and Representation Centre.
21. External Review
21.1. Having completed the Academic Appeal Procedure, the student may request
an external review by the Office of Independent Adjudicator for Higher Education
22. Recording and Disclosure of Information
22.1. Any finding of academic misconduct will be recorded on the student’s record
and reported to the Assessment Board or Research Degrees Board.

22.2. Offences will be kept on file so that penalties can be applied where a student
transfers from one University of Lancashire course to another during their period of
their studies and module credits gained on the former course are transferred to the
current course.
22.3. Where an allegation of academic misconduct has been upheld, the University
will inform relevant third parties of the nature and outcome of the case as required,
including:
•
•

the Professional, Statutory or Regulatory Body in the case of students on
professionally regulated courses or students who are professional registrants
the employer in the case of students on apprenticeship courses or members
of staff who are registered as students for a University award or students
who are professional registrants.

22.4. The University also reserves the right to inform other third parties of the nature
of the outcome of the case, including:
•
•

placement providers; and/or
potential employers in the event of a reference request.

22.5. The student will be informed in the event of any such disclosure
23. Monitoring and Review
23.1. Academic Integrity Leads will monitor the occurrence of academic misconduct
in each School and create action plans focusing on improvements using standard
templates which will be reported to Academic Registry.
23.2. An annual report on the occurrence of academic misconduct across Schools
will be submitted to the relevant Academic Board sub-committee, paying particular
regard to equality issues, for the purposes of assuring the integrity of all the
University’s academic awards and improving the provision of guidance to students
about good academic practice.
24. Related documents and Further Guidance
Academic Regulations (Taught Programmes)
Research Degree Regulations
Examination Procedures
Fitness to Practice Procedure

Policy on Misconduct in Research
Academic Appeals Procedure.
