The use of generative AI in Learning,
Teaching and Assessment
Policy owner: PVC Education and Student Experience
Version: 1.0
Implementation date: September 2026
Last review date: August 2026
Next review date: September 2027
Approved by: Academic Board

Generative AI in Learning, Teaching and Assessment Version1.0 published on September 2026, Middlesex
University London | Page 1

Middlesex University
The reasonable use of Generative Artificial Intelligence in Learning, Teaching and
Assessment
Introduction
1.
This policy provides a University level framework for staff and students in the
reasonable use of Generative Artificial Intelligence (Gen AI) in Learning, Teaching and
Assessment practices at Middlesex University (“the University”).
2.
The University encourages the use of Gen AI in the learning, teaching and assessment
environment. The University recognises the potential the technology has to enhance and
innovate learning, teaching and assessment practices, and to improve student experience.
3.
This policy is intended to provide guidance on the principles of reasonable, transparent
and ethical use, and is not limited to particular groups, or particular technologies.
4.
The University recognises that while this acts as an umbrella policy across the
University, there may be rationale for further faculty or subject based frameworks to meet local
need.
5. This policy should be read in conjunction with other University policies including:
a.
b.
c.
d.

Academic Misconduct Policy,
Assessment Moderation Policy,
Research Misconduct Policy,
Framework and Regulations.

Key principles
6.
The University’s current position is that Gen AI should be responsibly, ethically and
transparently integrated into learning, teaching and assessment, where it can be used to its
full potential, and to improve the student experience.
7.
Gen AI should be used to enhance practices, rather than replace them, and is not a
substitute for original thought, independent research or the production of original work.
8.
Students and staff are each individually responsible for their use of Gen AI and are
accountable for the outputs and outcomes created.
9.
An overreliance on Gen AI is understood to negatively impact a student’s learning, as
this may reduce engagement with and development of skills including criticality and reflection.
It is essential that students continue to engage with opportunities to develop their academic
skills and well as developing their Gen AI literacy.
10.

Typical uses of Gen AI include (but are not limited to)
a. Preparatory work, for example, collating and summarising content form a number
Generative AI in Learning, Teaching and Assessment Version1.0 published on September 2026, Middlesex
University London | Page 2

b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.

of sources.
Assisting with drafting ideas or structuring work.
Creating resources to support study or revision, including quizzes.
Helping to improve spelling, punctuation and grammar.
Assisting with data analysis within the principles of ethical use and data protection.
Stimulating conversations or role play activities to enhance practical skills.
Creating visual, audio or audio resources for educational purposes.

11.
The technology should be used in relevant, purposeful and responsible contexts, and
as such University staff and enrolled students should be supported to develop the required
Gen AI literacies to enable the right contexts for use to be identified.
12.

Gen AI literacy is defined as including:
a. Understanding how the technology can be used to achieve specific outcomes and
outputs.
b. Awareness that some aspects of the technology, known or unknown, may impact
the quality of the desired outcomes and outputs.
c. The ability to critique the credibility, reliability, accuracy and biases of Gen AI
outputs and their impact on desired outcomes and outputs.
d. Awareness of the wider impacts and implications of the technology, for example in
sustainability, environmental, social, cultural and socio-economic contexts.

13.
Gen AI should be embedded as a core employability skill, equipping students with the
digital fluency, critical thinking, and ethical awareness needed to thrive in AI-augmented
workplaces across sectors.
Use of GenAI in learning, teaching and assessment
14.
All students should have the chance to develop their Gen AI literacy across their
academic journey, through taught content, assessment or extra and co-curricular development
activities. Training in the use of Gen AI will be provided for students by the University.
15.
Learning, teaching and assessment should reflect real-world applications of AI,
preparing students to confidently engage with emerging technologies, adapt to evolving
industry practices, and contribute meaningfully to the future world of work.
16.
All assessments should make clear the expectations for use of Gen AI, and where the
use of Gen AI is not permitted. Examples of appropriate use will be provided for students by
their Programme teams. This should be made explicit to students in module handbooks and
assessment briefs.
17.

The University has identified three categories for the use of Gen AI in assessment:
Red

Gen AI is not permitted in the creation of the assessed work, unless the
technology is accessed through assistive technology, which is permitted
through a reasonable adjustment. Examples of ‘red assessment’ include
exams, vivas, interviews.

Generative AI in Learning, Teaching and Assessment Version1.0 published on September 2026, Middlesex
University London | Page 3

Amber

Gen AI may be used within defined parameters, made clear in the
assessment brief and / or module handbook. Gen AI should not be used to
generate text or media in the final submission but may be used to conduct
preparatory research or study (as defined in para 11). Where particular
tools should be used, these will be identified in the relevant documentation

Green

Gen AI may be used in the creation of content for an assessed piece of
work and the final submission. Where Gen AI is used, this should be
acknowledged and / or cited (para. 9)

18.
The use of Gen AI in producing work should be transparent and always disclosed. This
means acknowledging content created using Gen AI, citing as required, including in those
examples listed in paragraph 10. Guidance for this will be published in Programme
Handbooks.
Use of assistive technology
19.
Students with reasonable adjustments may have access to specific assistive
technologies to support them in their studies, and these technologies may include elements
powered by Gen AI.
20.
The use of assistive technology is permitted where its use, through a reasonable
adjustment, is intended to remove or reduce a disability-specific disadvantage. However, the
work produced must still be the student’s own work, as stated in this policy, and must comply
with the good academic practice
Unacceptable use of Gen AI
21.
It is not acceptable for students or staff to use Gen AI in contexts where use may gain
an unfair advantage over others, and / or to claim the production of work which an individual
has not produced.
22.

Staff and students may not use Gen AI to:
a. Produce an entire piece of work, or multiple parts of a piece of work which are then
claimed as their own.
b. Paraphrase the work of others, including other staff, students or organisations.
c. To translate work originally produced in a language other than English, without
appropriate acknowledgement or citation of the original source.
d. Produce and submit assessed work where the use of Gen AI has been cited, but
the work has been produced using a prompt which would be in contravention of
good academic practice, e.g., “write me a conclusion for xxx”
e. Manipulate or fabricate data or research findings.

23.
Where students are unclear on the use of Gen AI in the context in which they wish to
use it, they should refer to the assessment brief and / or module handbook, or to local faculty,
programme guidance, or a member of the programme teaching staff.

Generative AI in Learning, Teaching and Assessment Version1.0 published on September 2026, Middlesex
University London | Page 4

The use of AI detection tools in assessment
24.
The University’s current position is that AI detection tools continue to generate an
unproportionate number of ‘false positives’, meaning that results are not sufficiently reliable
as a basis for judging academic misconduct investigations.
25.
There are significant concerns about the GDPR compliance of AI detection tools, which
may also result in the disclosure of university intellectual property.
26.
Instead, the University encourages staff to design assessment, which is less
vulnerable to Gen AI, and to make human decisions on the potential use of Gen AI in the
production of student assessed work, where the assessed work is categorised as being ‘red’
or ‘amber’.
27.
Guidance on the vulnerability of assessment type and Gen AI is produced by the
Centre for Academic Practice Enhancement.
Gen AI and Academic misconduct
28.
Failure by a student, or a member of staff to follow the principles in the policy may
represent a breach of University regulations or other relevant policies, and the individual may
be subject to action taken under the relevant policy, for example the Academic Misconduct
Policy.

Generative AI in Learning, Teaching and Assessment Version1.0 published on September 2026, Middlesex
University London | Page 5
