STUDENT
REGULATIONS
FRAMEWORK
2025-26

STUDENT REGULATIONS FRAMEWORK 2025-26 –
CONTENTS
1.

MODULES AND CREDIT

1.1

Modules

1.2

Individual Programmes of Study

1.3

Departments and Programmes

1.4

Stages and Levels

1.5

Mode of study – full time and part-time

1.6

Undergraduate Honours

1.7

Joint Honours programmes

2.

REGISTERING AND MAKING CHANGES

2.1

Registration

2.2

Module Registration

2.3

Teaching Timetable

2.4

Changing seminar/practical group

2.5

Changing programme registration

2.6

Internal programme transfers - Level 4

2.7

Internal programme transfers - Levels 5 and 6

2.8

Module Choices

2.9

Changing modules

2.10

Study abroad

3.

ASSESSMENT REGULATIONS AND PROCEDURES

3.1

Introduction

3.2

Emergency Powers

3.3

Module Assessment Boards (MABs) – General Administration

University of St Mark & St John SRF 2025-26 contents: page 1 of 8

3.4

Module Assessment Boards (MABs) – Membership and Quoracy

3.5

Module Assessment Boards (MABs) – Business

3.6

Module Assessment Boards (MABs) – Moderation of Marks

3.7

Module Assessment Boards (MABs) – Decisions

3.8

Module Assessment Boards (MABs) – Assessment Penalties

3.9

Module Assessment Boards (MABs) – Finalising and Signing the Marksheet

3.10

Module Assessment Boards (MABs) – Convention for Reporting Resit
Requirements to the PAB

3.11

Student Review Process

3.12

Extenuating Circumstances

3.13

Viva Voce Examinations

3.14

Progression and Award Boards (PABs) – General

3.15

Progression and Award Boards (PABs) - Constitution, Terms of Reference and
Membership

3.16

Progression and Award Boards (PABs) - Process and Powers

3.17

Progression and Award Boards (PABs) – Decisions

3.18

Progression and Award Boards (PABs) - Delegation

3.19

Progression and Award Boards (PABs) – Minutes

3.20

Authority to Depart Exceptionally from University Regulations

3.21

Other Procedural Matters

4.

EXTENUATING CIRCUMSTANCES

4.1

Introduction

4.2

Definition

4.3

Examples of Extenuating Circumstances

4.4

Extenuating Circumstances not considered to be valid

4.5

Extenuating Circumstances and Valid Evidence

4.6

Serious and Confidential Extenuating Circumstances

4.7

Timing of an Extenuating Circumstances Submission

4.8

Misrepresentation and Falsehood

4.9

Data Protection Act 2018

4.10

Support for Students

University of St Mark & St John SRF 2025-26 contents: page 2 of 8

4.11

Procedures at Partner Organisations

4.12

The ‘Fit to Sit’ Principle

4.13

Extenuating Circumstances Appeal Process

4.14

Office of the Independent Adjudicator for Higher Education

5.

PROGRESSION

5.1

Points of Progression

5.2

Progression of Individual Students

6.

RETRIEVAL OF FAILURE

6.1

Retrieval of Failure - Undergraduate Condonement

6.2

Retrieval of Failure – Postgraduate Condonement

6.3

Retrieval of Failure – Resit and Deferral

6.4

Retrieval of Failure – Retake

6.5

Retrieval of Failure - Failure on Undergraduate Programmes

6.6

Retrieval of Failure - Failure on Taught Postgraduate Programmes

6.7

Acceptance of Awards

7.

AWARD CLASSIFICATION

7.1

General Regulations

7.2

Honours Degree Classification

7.3

Foundation Degree Classification

7.4

Masters Degree Classification

7.5

Integrated Masters Degree Classification

7.6

Apprenticeship Award Classification

7.7

Classification of other awards of the University

University of St Mark & St John SRF 2025-26 contents: page 3 of 8

8.

REGULATIONS FOR ACADEMIC AWARDS

8.1

Authority to Confer Awards

8.2

Named Awards

8.3

List of Awards

8.4

Standards of Awards

8.5

Entrance Requirements for Academic Awards

8.6

Admission with Credit and Transfer between Programmes

8.7

Credit Requirements for Academic Awards

8.8

Maximum Period of Registration

8.9

Classification of Awards

8.10

Conferment and Certification of Awards

8.11

Titles of Named Awards

8.12

General Regulations relating to Awards of the University

9.

SUPPORT TO CONTINUE IN STUDY PROCEDURE

9.1

Introduction

9.2

Stage One Procedure

9.3

Stage Two Procedure

9.4

Return to Study

10.

FITNESS TO PRACTISE PROCEDURE

10.1

Introduction

10.2

Acceptance on Programmes

10.3

Practise Placements

10.4

Professional Unsuitability

10.5

Interim Measures

10.6

Acceptable Behaviour

10.7

Stage One Procedure – Programme Level

10.8

Stage Two Procedure - Investigation

10.9

Stage Three Procedure – Fitness to Practise Panel

University of St Mark & St John SRF 2025-26 contents: page 4 of 8

10.10 Right of Appeal
10.11 Office of the Independent Adjudicator for Higher Education
10.12 Annual Report
10.13 Procedures at Partner Organisations

11.

ATTENDANCE, INTERRUPTION, WITHDRAWAL AND FEES

11.1

Attendance

11.2

Absence through illness

11.3

Interruption of Studies

11.4

Withdrawing from the University

11.5

Tuition Fees

11.6

Recording of module results for students who withdraw or interrupt

11.7

Fees Policy for students who withdraw or interrupt

12.

ASSESSMENT PRACTICES

12.1

Introduction

12.2

Module assessment

12.3

Programme assessment

12.4

Penalties for Late Submission

12.5

Marking Procedures

12.6

Marking and Grading

12.7

Criteria used in assessment

12.8

Examination Timetables

12.9

Additional examination arrangement requests

12.10 General information on examinations
12.11 Absence from an examination
12.12 Notification of results
12.13 External Examiners

University of St Mark & St John SRF 2025-26 contents: page 5 of 8

13.

SUBSTANTIAL ASSESSMENT TASKS

13.1

Introduction

13.2

Ethical Clearance

13.3

Dissertations and Honours Projects

13.4

Dissertations and Honours Project Requirements

13.5

Submission of Dissertations and Honours Projects

13.6

Feedback on Dissertations and Honours Projects

13.7

Library Dissertation and Honours Project Holdings

13.8

Undergraduate Independent Study Modules (ISMs)

13.9

Right to Copy

14.

ACADEMIC INTEGRITY PROCEDURE

14.1

Academic Integrity

14.2

Academic Misconduct – general principles

14.3

Definitions of academic misconduct

14.4

Allegations of academic misconduct

14.5

Academic Misconduct – Stage One procedures

14.6

Academic Misconduct – Stage Two procedures

14.7

Academic Misconduct – Stage Three procedures

14.8

Right of appeal

14.9

Office of the Independent Adjudicator for Higher Education

14.10 Annual Report
14.11 Procedures at Partner Organisations

15.

STUDENT MISCONDUCT PROCEDURE

15.1

Introduction and Scope

15.2

Examples of Misconduct

15.3

Reporting Misconduct

15.4

Interim Measures

15.5

Harassment and Discrimination

University of St Mark & St John SRF 2025-26 contents: page 6 of 8

15.6

Acceptable Behaviour

15.7

Student Misconduct – Stage One procedures

15.8

Student Misconduct – Stage Two procedures

15.9

Student Misconduct – Stage Three procedures

15.10 Right of appeal
15.11 Rights of Affected Students
15.12 Office of the Independent Adjudicator for Higher Education
15.13 Reconsideration of the same offence
15.14 Annual Report
15.15 Procedures at Partner Organisations

16.

ACADEMIC APPEAL PROCEDURE

16.1

Introduction

16.2

Right of Appeal

16.3

Grounds of Appeal

16.4

Exclusions from Appeal

16.5

Acceptable Behaviour

16.6

Responsibilities of Students

16.7

Informal resolution

16.8

Submission of Appeal

16.9

Review stage

16.10 Office of the Independent Adjudicator for Higher Education
16.11 Annual Report
16.12 Procedures at Partner Organisations

17.

COMPLAINTS PROCEDURE

17.1

The University’s Commitment on Complaints

17.2

How to Complain

17.3

Acceptable Behaviour

17.4

Results of Complaints

17.5

Anonymity with regard to complaints

University of St Mark & St John SRF 2025-26 contents: page 7 of 8

17.6

Confidentiality of complaints

17.7

Group Complaints

17.8

Early Resolution Stage (Stage One)

17.9

Formal Stage (Stage Two)

17.10 Review Stage (Stage Three)
17.11 Office of the Independent Adjudicator for Higher Education
17.12 Annual Report
17.13 Procedures at Partner Organisations

University of St Mark & St John SRF 2025-26 contents: page 8 of 8

1.

MODULES AND CREDIT
This section of the Student Regulations Framework applies to all taught
programmes of Plymouth Marjon University, whether undergraduate or
postgraduate, and to all apprentices enrolled on the University’s
apprenticeship programmes, who are classified as ‘students’ and referred to
accordingly throughout this Procedure.

1.1

Modules

1.

All taught programmes leading to named awards involve a set of modules
which, in the context of the award, have a specific status. Each module is
defined by way of a standardised module descriptor conforming to the module
template set out in the Quality Assurance Framework.

2.

University programmes consist primarily of credit rated modules. Each credit
represents a notional ten hours of study. Modules may be completed within
one term or semester, or span across two consecutive terms or semesters, but
must normally be completed within an academic session.

3.

Compulsory modules are those which must be taken for a student to be
eligible for the named award for which they are registered. Optional modules
are those modules from amongst which a student chooses, in order to
accumulate the requisite number of credits to ensure eligibility for the award
for which they are registered.

4.

Immersive modules are normally delivered at the onset of a student’s
programme in order to integrate them successfully into university life and
enhance retention.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Modules and Credit page 1 of 7

1.2

Individual Programmes of Study

1.

A programme of study is the set of modules that comprises a student's
individual academic experience leading to a particular named award within a
specific award framework.

2.

The programme specification details the modules available on any programme
of study.

3.

Each student must be normally registered for one programme of study (named
award) only. However, they may apply to transfer from one programme to
another subject to availability and their meeting the required criteria (see
Section 2 of this Framework).

1.3

Departments and Programmes
Modules are provided by Academic Departments, groups of staff with cognate
academic interests, led by an Academic Director, but they may contribute to a
number of different Programmes. A Programme comprises defined modules
provided by one or more Academic Departments. Each Programme, or agreed
group of Programmes, has a designated Programme Leader or Programme
Area Leader with whom students may discuss any issues related to their
Programme as a whole. Decisions about students’ performance in a module,
including confirmation of marks, are made at the Module Assessment Board
owning the module (as indicated by the module code) regardless of the
programmes it contributes to.

1.4

Stages and Levels

1.

Each stage of an undergraduate degree programme consists of 120 credits of
modules taken at an appropriate level. Programmes of 240 credits therefore
consist of two stages (Stages 1 & 2); and programmes of 360 credits, such as
the BA/BSc Honours degrees (except for top-up degrees), consist of three

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Modules and Credit page 2 of 7

stages (Stages 1, 2 & 3). For most full-time students, there is a clear relation
between years of study and stages and an even distribution of modules across
the year of study. However, for part-time students, a stage may require two or
more years of study of modules.
2.

A level is an indicator of the relative demand, complexity and depth of learning
associated with a module or with a stage of a programme (see the QAA’s
Framework for Higher Education Qualifications, available at www.qaa.ac.uk).
The University offers the following levels of taught study: Level 4, Level 5,
Level 6 and Level 7. Levels 4 to 6 are associated with undergraduate
provision, and Level 7 is associated with postgraduate provision. An
Integrated Master’s programme may include modules at both Level 6 and
Level 7 in stage 3 of the programme.

3.

At Level 4 (Stage 1), 120 credits of modules are taken by students. Level 4
modules receive a mark and credits, but only contribute to the final degree
classification for Foundation Degrees. At Level 5 (Stage 2), students take 120
credits of modules. Level 5 modules receive a mark and credits and contribute
to the final Foundation Degree or Honours Degree classification (except for
top-up degrees). At Level 6 (Stage 3), 120 credits of modules are taken for
Honours Degrees. For Integrated Master’s programmes, Level 6 and Level 7
credits may be taken at Stage 3, as detailed in the Programme Specification.

4.

Integrated Master’s programmes consist of four stages (at Levels 4, 5, 6 and
7) with a total credit value of 480 credits and a minimum of 120 credits at Level
7 at Stage 4. Students must obtain 120 credits at Stage 3 at Level 6 or above
before progressing to Level 7 (Stage 4).

5.

Top-up (or direct entry) degrees consist of 120 credits at Level 6 (Stage 3) and
are explicitly validated as such, with direct entry to Level 6 (Stage 3) in all
instances.

6.

Foundation Degree programmes consist of two stages (at Levels 4 and 5)
each of 120 credits.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Modules and Credit page 3 of 7

7.

Certificate of Higher Education (CertHE) programmes consist of 120 credits at
Level 4.

8.

Specific programmes can also include modules delivered at Level 3 (Stage 0),
but only where this is explicitly set out in the relevant Programme
Specification. This will not affect the application of the standard regulations for
undergraduate provision to these programmes in their entirety.

9.

Unless the Programme Specification states otherwise, every postgraduate
taught programme is divided into two stages. The taught stage comprises
modules to the value of 120 credits at Level 7; the dissertation stage
comprises a single dissertation rated at 60 Level 7 credits. The Master’s award
comprises 180 credits of modules at Level 7 and includes the dissertation.

10.

The requirements for the attainment of awards, including exit awards, are set
out in Section 8 of this Framework.

1.5

Mode of Study – Full Time and Part-Time

1.

All full-time undergraduate students (on Honours and Foundation Degrees)
must take a minimum of 120 credits in each year, usually comprised of six 20credit modules (or the equivalent) in each year, normally three in each
semester or two in each term. Students on accelerated degrees may take up
to 200 credits per year across two stages. Exceptionally, where a Progression
and Award Board has permitted a student to progress whilst ‘trailing’ a
module, a student may take up to 80 credits in one semester or 60 credits in
one term.

2.

Part-time undergraduate students are subject to the same conditions of entry
as full-time students, and the same awards are open to them except the BEd
Honours and accelerated degrees. They will normally complete a programme
of study leading to a degree with Honours in 5-6 years or a Foundation
Degree in 3 to 4 years, but they could take longer provided they continue to
engage with their studies – see Section 8 of this Framework. Part-time

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Modules and Credit page 4 of 7

students may not take more than 80 credits per year or 40 credits per
semester. Regulations governing progression and retrieval of initial failure
apply equally to full-time and part-time students.
3.

In cases where the University reviews and revalidates a programme, modifies
the regulatory framework and/or changes the menu of modules available, parttime students who extend, or return to their studies following interruption, may
be required to change their registration in line with the new arrangements.

4.

Students may apply to transfer from one mode to another on completion of
assessment at the end of any semester/term. The transfer form is available on
Antler and MyMarjon. Students should be aware of the financial implications of
a change in mode of attendance and should seek advice from their Personal
Development Tutor and Student Wellbeing and Support prior to requesting a
change.

1.6

Undergraduate Honours

1.

For Undergraduate Honours awards, details of the modules to be studied are
contained within the relevant Programme Specification and the relevant page
of the Virtual Learning Environment.

2.

At Stage 1, students take 120 credits at Level 4, of which a minimum of 80
credits should be in the Single Honours programme. These modules normally
include those compulsory modules which are prerequisites for the taking of the
programme at Levels 5 and 6.

3.

In order to take modules at Level 5, full-time students must normally have
accumulated 120 credits by successfully completing six Level 4 modules,
including those that are the prerequisites for Level 5 and Level 6 modules in
the programme concerned. Students take a minimum of 80 credits in the
Honours programme at level 5. In order to take modules at Level 6, full-time
students (except for top-up degree students) must normally have accumulated
240 credits by successfully completing six Level 4 and six Level 5 modules,

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Modules and Credit page 5 of 7

including those that are the prerequisites for Level 6 modules in the
programme concerned. Students take all of their 120 credits in the Single
Honours programme at level 6. Detailed regulations for progression are to be
found in Section 5 of this Framework.
4.

Only Level 5 and Level 6 modules are considered in the classification of nontop-up Honours awards. In the case of top-up Honours awards, only Level 6
modules are considered.

5.

Dissertations can be 20 or 40 credits.

6.

In exceptional circumstances and subject to the approval of the Academic
Registrar and Programme Leader or Programme Area Leader concerned, an
appropriate single 20 credit module may be taken as an independent study
module (ISM) at either Level 5 or Level 6.

1.7

Joint Honours programmes

1.

The title of a Joint Honours award defines a coherent programme of study,
with modules from two single subjects and an approximate balance between
the two subjects.

2.

Students registered on Joint Honours programmes shall attempt at least 160
credits in total in each of the two subjects. The dissertation or project may be
in either or both subjects.

3.

For a Joint Honours award, the first named title in the award will be
determined by the dissertation or project. Where the dissertation or project is
in both subjects, the title ‘A and B’ will be in alphabetical order.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Modules and Credit page 6 of 7

Document Title

Plymouth Marjon University Student
Regulations Framework – Section 1 Modules
and Credit

Document Reference

L:\Student Regulations Framework\Student
Regulations Framework 2025-26

Version

3.18

Issuing Authority

Senate

Custodian

Academic Standards Officer

Document Date

16th October 2009

Last Amended

16th July 2025

Sensitivity

Unclassified

Circulation

Website

Effective from

September 2025

Review Date

Ongoing

Effective until

September 2026

History

Updated annually and subject to routine ongoing
revision.

Equality Impact Assessment

Preliminary EIA conducted for SRF, December
2010. Updated Equality Analysis Form to be
submitted.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Modules and Credit page 7 of 7

2.

REGISTERING AND MAKING CHANGES
This section of the Student Regulations Framework applies to all taught
programmes of Plymouth Marjon University, whether undergraduate or
postgraduate, to all research degree students, and to all apprentices enrolled
on the University’s apprenticeship programmes, who are classified as
‘students’ and referred to accordingly throughout this Procedure.

2.1

Registration

1.

Every student - whether full-time or part-time, and whether following a
programme for a University award or not - must complete the University’s
registration procedures. This also applies to students at the University’s
partner institutions. Students who do not register cannot attend teaching or
access any other elements of their programme, such as placements, and their
results will not be presented to the relevant Progression and Award Board.

2.

Plymouth Marjon University will not admit an applicant to a programme of
study if the application contains false or incomplete information. Moreover, the
Academic Registrar may exclude from the University any student whose
application was based upon, or included, false or incomplete information. In
the case of returning students, this includes the failure of the student to inform
the University of the outcome of any previous student misconduct
proceedings.

3.

The Academic Registrar will terminate a student’s registration on a programme
under the following circumstances:
•

if a Progression and Award Board has excluded the student from the
programme (Section 3 of this Framework)

•

if a Programme Leader or Programme Area Leader has reported that the
student is no longer engaged with the programme (Section 11 of this
Framework)

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Registering and Making Changes: page 1 of 10

•

if the University Finance Department reports that the student has failed to
discharge any liability to the University, e.g. tuition fees (Section 11 of this
Framework)

•

if the Chair of an Academic or Student Misconduct Panel notifies a penalty
of expulsion from the University (Section 14 and Section 15 of this
Framework)

•

if a Fitness to Practice Panel requires the termination of a student’s
registration on a programme (Section 10 of this Framework)

4.

Students who wish to change their programme of study must seek the prior
advice of the Programme Leader or Programme Area Leader concerned and
the approval of Student Wellbeing and Support as required on the Transfer
Request Form (available on Antler or MyMarjon).

5.

Any changes since registration must be notified, without delay, by either:
•

completion of the appropriate form (in the case of changes to programme
of study, mode of attendance or registration status)

•

via Antler or MyMarjon (in case of changes to personal details such as
address and telephone numbers)

•

in writing (in the case of a change of name). The University will require
evidence of the legal change to any name (i.e. marriage certificate or
Change of Name by Deed Poll).

In case of difficulty or where further advice is needed, queries should be
addressed to the Registry and Programme Support Office
(RPSO@marjon.ac.uk). The University can accept no responsibility for
any consequences if a student fails to meet these requirements.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Registering and Making Changes: page 2 of 10

6.

Plymouth Marjon University deems any additional information it intends to
deliver to a student to have been received by that student if:
• It is published on the University's website, Canvas or any VLE (Virtual
Learning Environment) whose existence has been notified to students.
• It is sent by electronic mail to the student’s University e-mail account,
provided that five working days (or fifteen working days during vacations)
shall elapse before receipt can be presumed. The student is responsible for
ensuring that any e-mails sent to their University e-mail address are
redirected to any personal e-mail address, and guidance can be provided.
• The Module Leader gives it to students in person at the first lecture or point
of contact at the commencement of the delivery of the module (note that it is
the responsibility of individual students who, for any reason, were not
present when that information was provided, to take whatever steps are
necessary to acquire the information).
• It is delivered by hand to a student in person, or to the latest address
notified to the University as their local or home address, and the person
delivering it has certified a copy of the document to that effect: or
• It is sent by first class mail, or Recorded or Special Delivery, to the latest
address notified to the University as their local or home address provided
that five working days (or fifteen working days during vacations) shall
elapse before receipt can be presumed.
Students should also make appropriate arrangements to collect any mail that
has been sent to them by Recorded or Special Delivery.
In addition, please note that the University's definition of 'working days' is in
accordance with the standard Government definition. A working day, therefore,
is any day that is not a Saturday, Sunday or bank holiday.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Registering and Making Changes: page 3 of 10

7.

Students on professionally-accredited programmes and programmes that
involve regulated activities with children/vulnerable adults requiring clearance
from the Disclosure and Barring Services, either before commencing their
programme of study or during their programme, must inform the Registry and
Programme Support Office, in writing, of any criminal conviction, caution,
warning or reprimand received after they start their programme. Failure to do
so may result in misconduct proceedings and may result in the student being
immediately withdrawn from that programme of study.

2.2

Module Registration
Students must ensure that they have been correctly registered onto relevant
modules. Incorrect registration can have serious repercussions for
examinations and other assessment and students who do not follow the
correct procedures may not be able to submit work for modules for which they
have failed to register. The University makes module registration information
available to students in a variety of ways through its Virtual Learning
Environment. Students must check this information and report any errors to
the Registry and Programme Support Office (RPSO@marjon.ac.uk)
immediately. Module Leaders must also check the accuracy of module lists
regularly and report inaccuracies promptly to the Registry and Programme
Support Office. All modules will operate in accordance with their definitive
module descriptor. All module choices must be in line with the provisions set
out in Section 1.5 of this Framework with regard to modes of study.

2.3

Teaching Timetable
Timetable information and seminar group allocations are posted on the
University’s Virtual Learning Environment. For each module, the timetable for
lectures and seminars are shown. Students who have any issues with their
timetable must contact the Timetable Unit immediately.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Registering and Making Changes: page 4 of 10

2.4

Changing Seminar/Practical Group
The published module lists indicate the seminar or practical group that has
been allocated to the student where this applies. The timetable shows where
and when these activities take place. Allocations are made to facilitate agreed
programme combinations, to produce even distributions between groups, and
to share out the less popular timetable slots. If a student wishes to request a
change, this must be initially discussed with the Module Leader. If a change is
made, the Module Leader must inform the relevant office(s) so that students
can be contacted in an emergency.

2.5

Changing Programme Registration
It may be possible to transfer from one programme to another within three
weeks of the course start date or before the start of the next Semester, subject
to the nature of the programme. Any student who wishes to explore this
option should discuss the situation in the first instance with the new
Programme Leader and Student Wellbeing and Support as promptly as
possible. Approval of a transfer is subject to places being available, to the
suitability of entry qualifications, and to programme-specific regulations. For
example, programmes leading to professional accreditation may require
students to undertake and pass all modules regardless of any other academic
credit they may have gained. Students who have failed one or more modules
may apply to transfer but failed modules must be redeemed through
successful re-assessment. If the change of programme is allowed, the
University will notify the appropriate funding authorities. Applications should be
made via the Transfer Request Form available on Antler and MyMarjon.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Registering and Making Changes: page 5 of 10

2.6

Internal Programme Transfers - Level 4

1.

Students wishing to change their degree programme during the first year
should seek advice from their Personal Development Tutor, the new
Programme Leader and/or Student Wellbeing and Support in the first instance.
Approval is subject to places being available and the regulations for the
relevant award framework and programme e.g. requirements for Disclosure
and Barring Service checks.

2.

In the case of applications from students in their first year, received within
fifteen working days of the course start date, it may be possible for a
programme change to take immediate effect. In such cases, the student will
be registered for the modules appropriate to their new programme(s) as listed
in the initial module registrations. This timeframe can be adjusted in specific
circumstances, subject to the affected students being informed in advance.

3.

Students wishing to apply for internal transfer should do so at the earliest
opportunity following discussion with the Programme Leader and Student
Wellbeing and Support.

4.

A student who wishes to transfer programme, after the time limits specified,
can either complete the current stage of their programme, or interrupt their
studies and transfer at the start of the following academic year. They should
seek advice from Student Wellbeing and Support before deciding. Any transfer
will be subject to the conditions listed in Section 2.5 of this Framework above.

2.7

Internal Programme Transfers - Levels 5 and 6

1.

Students wishing to join, or change, programmes at Levels 5 and 6 should
seek advice from their Personal Development Tutor, their Programme Leader
and/or Student Wellbeing and Support in the first instance. Approval is subject
to places being available and the regulations for the award framework and
programme e.g. requirements for Disclosure and Barring Service checks.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Registering and Making Changes: page 6 of 10

Applications should be made on the Transfer Request Form available on
Antler and MyMarjon.
2.

The transfer will only be permitted if the student has successfully completed
the relevant stage(s) of their current programme. This includes modules that
are prerequisites for entry to the next level in the programme to be taken. A
directly equivalent programme of work completed successfully, or recognised
prior learning (RP(E)L), may be acceptable instead of the published
prerequisites for a module or for entry to a programme at Levels 5 and 6. The
transfer request will be forwarded to the relevant Programme Leader or
Programme Area Leader, to confirm authorisation so that the student record
can be updated. Student Wellbeing and Support will be notified to discuss any
implications with the student.

3.

Mid-year transfers (end of Semester A/Term 1/2) will only be considered on an
individual basis and will require support from the Programme Leaders and
Student Wellbeing and Support.

2.8

Module Choices

1.

The online Module Choice process is made available to all students on
programmes with optional modules each year so that they can select their
modules for the following academic year. Programme Leaders or Programme
Area Leaders will outline choices available to their students, where applicable,
providing programme information to students. Students complete the online
choices process, and their choices are then confirmed by the relevant
Programme Leader or Programme Area Leader. The Registry and Programme
Support Office reserves the right to allocate module choices to any student
who has not completed the process so that resource and timetable planning
can proceed.

2.

It may be possible to change these allocations before the start of the next
academic year through the Module Choice portal, but only if there are
sufficient places available and the timetable permits. The Registry and

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Registering and Making Changes: page 7 of 10

Programme Support Office will query any choices that are incompatible with
undergraduate regulations and permissible combinations.
3.

In the majority of cases, students are able to study the modules they have
selected. However, if a module is not viable due to low enrolment numbers it
may be withdrawn. If so, the appropriate Programme Leader or Programme
Area Leader will contact students affected, advise them of alternative
replacement module(s) and advise the Registry and Programme Support
Office accordingly.

2.9

Changing Modules

1.

Module changes, after the start of the academic year or the start date of the
Semester when the module is taught, will need to be discussed with the
Programme Leader or Programme Area Leader who will email the request to
Registry with their authority for the change. Late module transfers will only be
considered before any assessment submissions are required and cannot
constitute grounds for an extenuating circumstance claim.

2.

Students wishing to change modules within fifteen working days of the start of
the academic year, or before the start of Semester B/C, should first discuss
the matter with the relevant Programme Leader or Programme Area Leader.
Approval is subject to places being available, continued adherence to
programme regulations, and the timetable facilitating this. The University
advises students not to change modules after the second week of the
semester, trimester or term. This timeframe can be adjusted in specific
circumstances, subject to the affected students being informed in advance.

3.

Late changes will only be accepted in exceptional circumstances, where the
appropriate Programme Leader or Programme Area Leader is in agreement.
Moreover, late entry to a module will not constitute extenuating circumstances
in relation to assessments. A student starting a module late is required to
undertake all the assessments for that module - no student may therefore join
a module after the first assessment deadline has passed. A student will not be

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Registering and Making Changes: page 8 of 10

permitted to select an alternative module which results in a timetable clash
being created.
4.

External or internal students applying to enter directly into Years 2 and 3 will
be sent details of optional modules where appropriate for their course by the
Programme Leader or Programme Area Leader in advance of their
registration. The student must complete the Module Choice Form available
from MyMarjon. The Registry and Programme Support Office will consult with
the Programme Leader or Programme Area Leader for approval.

2.10 Study Abroad
1.

Students on full-time Honours degrees may undertake study abroad, for up to
60 credits of study, at approved institutions on approved module-equivalent
programmes as part of their programme. This is available to them normally
during their second year of study, when undertaking Level 5 modules, and
usually (but not exclusively) during the second semester. These equivalent
programmes must be passed, and failure will prevent progression to Level 6.
Credits for the modules will be awarded but, as no grades are carried forward,
this will not be included within a student’s final degree classification.

2.

Students who are interested in studying abroad, subject to available
opportunities, should contact their Programme Leader/Programme Area
Leader in the first instance. The relevant application form must be completed
no later than March of the previous year for Semester A study, and no later
than October of the relevant year for Semester B study. The relevant
Programme Leader or Programme Area Leader must support the application,
given the potential implications for any student.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Registering and Making Changes: page 9 of 10

Document Title

Plymouth Marjon University Student
Regulations Framework – Section 2 Registering
and Making Changes

Document Reference

L:\Student Regulations Framework\Student
Regulations Framework 2025-26

Version

3.12

Issuing Authority

Senate

Custodian

Academic Standards Officer

Document Date

16th October 2009

Last Amended

21st May 2025

Sensitivity

Unclassified

Circulation

Website, paper copies

Effective from

September 2025

Review Date

Ongoing

Effective until

September 2026

History

Updated annually and subject to routine ongoing
revision.

Equality Impact Assessment

Preliminary EIA conducted for SRF, December
2010. Updated Equality Analysis Form to be
submitted.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Registering and Making Changes: page 10 of 10

3.

ASSESSMENT REGULATIONS AND
PROCEDURES
This section of the Student Regulations Framework applies to all taught
programmes of Plymouth Marjon University, whether undergraduate or
postgraduate and to all apprentices enrolled on the University’s apprenticeship
programmes, who are classified as ‘students’ and referred to accordingly
throughout this Procedure.

3.1

Introduction

1.

These regulations set out the assessment responsibilities within Plymouth
Marjon University relating to taught programmes of study and should be read
in conjunction with other information in this Framework. What follows applies
to the formal processes of the Module Assessment Boards and Progression
and Award Boards relating to all taught provision.

2.

The University operates a two-tier arrangement of Module Assessment Boards
(MABs) and Progression and Award Boards (PABs) for all taught programmes.

3.

Module Assessment Boards determine the final mark for each student in every
module within their purview and award credit for the module to every student
who has demonstrated achievement of the learning outcomes of those
modules.

4.

Progression and Award Boards make decisions relating to the progression of
students in programmes and the consequence of failure at any stage of a
programme. They also make recommendations for the conferment and
classification of awards to Senate.

5.

Module Assessment Boards must use the University standard module
marksheets for all University-approved modules. On completion, the marks
must be made available to the Registry and Programme Support Office by the

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Assessment Regulations & Procedures: page 1 of 25

date stated in the Assessments Calendar published on Antler and MyMarjon
each year
6.

The Academic Registrar is responsible for the oversight of all formal
examinations and PABs, assisted by Registry Services staff.

7.

The Deans of Faculty are responsible for the academic standards and the
content of examination papers or coursework assignments.

3.2

Emergency Powers
Exceptionally, circumstances beyond the control of the University might make
it impossible to operate the processes of assessment in accordance with
these regulations and procedures. In such circumstances, the ViceChancellor, as Chair of Senate, may vary these regulations and procedures or
vary the constitution or quoracy requirements of any board, panel or
committee. The Vice-Chancellor will make the variation(s) known to staff and
students in writing. Before doing so, the Vice-Chancellor will notify the Chair of
the Board of Governors in writing of the variation and the reasons for it. The
Vice-Chancellor will also report the variation and the reasons for it to the next
meeting of Senate. Specific powers relating to Module Assessment Boards
and Progression and Award Boards are to be found in the relevant sections of
these regulations. Guidance on using these powers may be obtained from the
Academic Registrar.

3.3

Module Assessment Boards (MABs) – General
Administration

1.

The Registry and Programme Support Office is responsible for scheduling all
Module Assessment Boards and the associated arrangements. Deans of
Faculty inform all internal examiners of the schedule that relates to them.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Assessment Regulations & Procedures: page 2 of 25

2.

The Registry and Programme Support Office schedules and publishes the
dates and times of the Progression and Award Boards.

3.

Deans of Faculty, assisted by the appropriate administrators, are responsible
for ensuring that accurate marks, and annotations, are presented to the
relevant University Assessment Boards.

4.

Deans of Faculty are responsible for liaising with External Examiners
regarding inspection of coursework and practical examinations.

5.

The Registry and Programme Support Office is responsible for the coordination of agreed marks from Module Assessment Boards and the
presentation of these marks to the appropriate Progression and Award Board.

3.4

Module Assessment Boards (MABs) – Membership and
Quoracy

1.

Membership of a Module Assessment Board is as follows:
•

The Chair, who will normally be an Associate Dean of Faculty or an
appropriate nominee

•

The External Examiner(s) for the cognate groups of modules under
consideration

•

Module Leaders of all modules to be considered by the Board.

In addition, the Academic Registrar has the right to attend or to send a
nominee.
2.

A Module Assessment Board will be quorate if the following members are in
attendance:
•

The Chair or nominated deputy

•

The External Examiner(s) (however, the Board may proceed if the External
Examiner is exceptionally unable to attend in accordance with the

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Assessment Regulations & Procedures: page 3 of 25

procedure described in the Handbook for External Examiners and
Moderators).
3.

The Chair is appointed on the authority of Senate and is accountable to
Senate for ensuring that the Module Assessment Board fulfils its
responsibilities in accordance with these regulations and procedures.

4.

In addition to the membership, a person shall be appointed to act as Secretary
to the Board to provide to the Chair of the Board a draft record of its
proceedings as soon as possible after the meeting. This will include a list of
those present and the capacity in which they attended, all the decisions made
and the reasons for them. The Chair is responsible for ensuring that minutes
are circulated to members as soon as reasonably practicable after the meeting
and that a copy is lodged with Registry 48 hours before any Progression and
Award Board that will receive decisions of the Module Assessment Board.

5.

No student may attend any part of a meeting of a Module Assessment Board,
unless they are a member of staff or approved External Examiner who is
coincidentally registered as a student on another programme of the University
or elsewhere.

6.

The role of the External Examiner, the associated rights and responsibilities
and the procedure to be followed if the External Examiner is exceptionally
unable to attend the meeting, are described in the Handbook for External
Examiners and Moderators.

7.

A Module Leader who is exceptionally unable to attend a meeting of a Module
Assessment Board must provide written advice to the Board relating to the
assessment of their module(s). If, exceptionally, they are unable to provide
such advice, the Chair will investigate the assessment of the module and
report to the Module Assessment Board on behalf of the Module Leader.

8.

Module Assessment Boards should start promptly, and all members should
have with them their own copies of relevant module descriptors, regulations
etc.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Assessment Regulations & Procedures: page 4 of 25

9.

In circumstances beyond the University’s control where it is not possible to
convene a normally constituted Module Assessment Board, the ViceChancellor, having received advice from the Academic Registrar, will
determine the arrangements necessary to conduct the business of the
meeting. In such circumstances, the decision and the reasons for it will be
reported in full to the next meeting of Senate.

3.5

Module Assessment Boards (MABs) – Business

1.

The Module Assessment Board will receive:
•

the minutes of its previous substantive meeting and any intervening
meetings

•

notification of any actions taken under delegated authority

•

the current approved module descriptor of each module

•

the examination papers, coursework and other assessments used

•

the name of any student alleged to have been guilty of academic
misconduct in relation to any of the modules under consideration and
details of any action taken in relation to it

•

the previous annual report and interim report of the External Examiner and
the response to these reports

•

the record of the relevant RPL Board

•

in respect of each student:
o if appropriate, a report on any placement or work-based learning
undertaken including details of placement hours undertaken
o if appropriate, a report on any practical activity undertaken
o the overall mark for the module

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Assessment Regulations & Procedures: page 5 of 25

o the mark for each assessment element (i.e. coursework,
examination etc)
o the mark for each component
o a record against each assessment mark of any decision made by
the Registry and Programme Support Office for Extenuating
Circumstances
o a record against each mark showing if it is the result of the
application of an assessment penalty and, if it is, the mark without
penalty should also be available
2.

The Module Assessment Board shall:
•

agree the final version of the minutes of the previous meeting to be a true
record of that meeting and note any matters arising from them.

•

receive the summary statistics available for each module and identify any
anomalies which may require attention by the Board, or action for the next
academic session.

•

scrutinise the marks or grades relating to each module and the analysis of
the marks and identify and obtain an explanation for any anomaly, or other
cause for concern, and take any action considered necessary, seeking
advice from the External Examiner.

•

having taken any such action, make decisions in relation to each student,
as described below, taking into account any decisions of the Extenuating
Circumstances Panel.

•

recommend the marks or grades for each candidate in each module, in
accordance with those decisions.

•

assign credit to individual students on the basis of the confirmed marks or
grades.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Assessment Regulations & Procedures: page 6 of 25

•

make recommendations for resit and/or deferral assessments for those
students who have not been assigned credit.

•

authorise the update of the Student Record System and the notification of
recommended marks to students.

•

receive an oral report from each External Examiner concerning the
standards achieved by students and the quality of the provision.

•

review the responses to the previous External Examiner’s reports and
consider the rationale for any recommendations that have not been acted
upon.

•

consider the adequacy of all assessments used in each module and make
recommendations for future assessments.

•

formally delegate its authority to Chair’s Action to resolve any cases arising
from resit or deferral, or where, subsequent to the meeting, students
present reasons and circumstances, considered by the Chair to be both
acceptable and supported by satisfactory evidence, which have led to a
mark or grade being wrongly confirmed. In all such cases the Chair must
document their decision, the reasons for it, and the extent of any
consultation and report the decision without delay to the Registry and
Programme Support Office for presentation at the Progression and Award
Board and to the next meeting of the Module Assessment Board.

3.6

Module Assessment Boards (MABs) – Moderation of Marks

1.

Module Assessment Boards may moderate marks as a collective decision, on
the recommendation of an External Examiner, and after reviewing the full
range of information if, in the opinion of the Board, any of the following have
occurred:
•

the pass threshold has been incorrectly applied.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Assessment Regulations & Procedures: page 7 of 25

•

the marks do not fall within the expected mark distribution.

•

the Dean of Faculty confirms that an Academic Department or programme
management issue, including any such issue that has been identified via
the formal complaints process, has disadvantaged all students taking the
module.

2.

The Chair of the Module Assessment Board must ensure that any moderation,
and the reason for it, is recorded in the minutes.

3.7

Module Assessment Boards (MABs) – Decisions

1.

The Module Assessment Board recommends grades awarded to individual
students and module cohorts. It has the authority to review cohort results, but
not individual student marks.

2.

In the event of a rubric infringement such as attempting more examination
questions than required, the Module Assessment Board will receive a mark
that disregards the lower or lowest mark.

3.

Where students are given target word counts or equivalents for an
assessment, the instructions for the assessment should make clear before the
student undertakes the assessment what the consequences of exceeding or
failing to reach the word count are. These are likely to be determined by the
practice in a particular discipline or programme. Those consequences should
be applied in the marking process and associated comment should be made
in the feedback to the student. The Module Assessment Board should receive
details of adjustments of this kind which will be fully recorded in the Module
Assessment Board minutes.

4.

The module mark reported to students and to the Module Assessment Board
and Progression and Award Board will be a rounded integer as follows:
•

a decimal of x.50 or greater shall round up to the next highest integer.

•

a decimal lower than x.50 shall round down to the next lowest integer.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Assessment Regulations & Procedures: page 8 of 25

5.

In respect of each student on each module, the Module Assessment Board
must make one of the following decisions, which it will pass to the Progression
and Award Board.
a)

Passed - confirms that the credit has been assigned. A module is
passed if a student has achieved the module outcomes, the evidence
for this being achievement of the overall module pass mark (40% for
undergraduate modules, 50% for postgraduate modules) regardless of
the mark achieved in any element of assessment. Note however that
certain programme regulations may require all elements of some or all
modules to be passed for professional accreditation purposes. In such
cases the MAB will annotate the mark “n” to show that the module is not
yet passed for professional accreditation purposes.

b)

Failed - confirms that the student has not achieved the module
outcomes and that credit has not been assigned.

c)

No Decision – confirms either that the student has not satisfactorily
completed the assessment of the module for a good reason that would
not be considered under the Extenuating Circumstances Procedures, or
that the Module Assessment Board has been unable to confirm the
mark and assign credit because of some procedural delay. In such
cases, the Chair should ensure that the reasons for such missing marks
are noted in full, so that they can be accurately forwarded to the
Progression and Award Board for decision-making purposes.

d)

Decision Withheld – confirms that the Module Assessment Board has
made a decision but has withheld notification of it to the student and to
the Progression and Award Board until the outcome of Academic
Misconduct Procedures is known (in accordance with Section 14 of this
Framework). In all such cases the marksheet will be appropriately
annotated.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Assessment Regulations & Procedures: page 9 of 25

3.8

Module Assessment Boards (MABs) – Assessment
Penalties

1.

Responsibility for the application of assessment penalties rests with the
Module Assessment Board when it determines the final mark in the module.

2.

All cases in which assessment penalties have been applied, or in which work
has not been accepted for assessment, shall be reported to the Module
Assessment Board and to the Progression and Award Board.

3.

The Module Assessment Board will waive an assessment penalty if it receives
an Extenuating Circumstances decision from the Registry and Programme
Support Office that late submission of that work was due to valid Extenuating
Circumstances.

4.

The Module Assessment Board cannot waive penalties imposed in
accordance with the University’s Academic Integrity Procedure (Section 14 of
this Framework) or impose any penalty for alleged academic misconduct. In
the event of such an allegation coming to light at the meeting, or being
unresolved by the time of the meeting, the Module Assessment Board will
make its decisions in the normal way. However, the Progression and Award
Board will withhold them from the student until the outcome is known,
appropriately annotating the marksheet.

3.9

Module Assessment Boards (MABs) – Finalising and
Signing the Marksheet

1.

When the Module Assessment Board has agreed the marks, with or without
moderation, the Chair and the External Examiner sign the marksheet where
paper copies are still provided, or together recommend the submission of
marks into the student record. Where multiple marksheets require signature, a
cover sheet may be signed instead to confirm this. The significance of this
process, and the procedure to be followed if the External Examiner is unable

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Assessment Regulations & Procedures: page 10 of 25

or unwilling to sign the marksheet, is described in the Handbook for External
Examiners and Moderators.
2.

After the External Examiner has completed this process, no marks may be
changed, other than in exceptional circumstances and with the written
agreement of the External Examiner. Marks recommended at the MAB may
not be released to individual students until all assessment results are
published by the Registry and Programme Support Office.

3.

For Level 5 and 6 modules, any changes to the module mark sheets made at
the Module Assessment Board must be recorded in the minutes.

3.10 Module Assessment Boards (MABs) – Convention for
Reporting Resit Requirements to the PAB
1.

Module Assessment Boards are required to make recommendations to the
Progression and Award Board concerning students with failed modules and/or
modules in which the assessment is deferred.

2.

Students must always pass every element of assessment that the Board has
set for their retrieval of failure. Specifically, resit marks cannot be combined
with existing marks from passed elements, nor with each other, so that the
student accumulates a module pass mark.

3.

Chairs of Module Assessment Boards must ensure that notations, as
approved by the Academic Registrar, appear after each module score on the
module mark sheet where resit assessment is to be recommended. See
Section 6 of this Framework for further information about setting resit work.
See Section 4 of this Framework relating to deferred assessment in cases of
valid Extenuating Circumstances.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Assessment Regulations & Procedures: page 11 of 25

3.11 Student Review Process
1.

The Teaching, Learning and Academic Quality Committee will assess the
engagement and progress of its undergraduate students at appropriate points
during the session, on behalf of Senate, with specific reference to:
•

Modules with a high number of fails.

•

Student profiles that demonstrate a downward or upward trend from
previous marks.

•
2.

Any queries related to registration or enrolment.

The Registry and Programme Support Office will then seek comments, on
behalf of the Academic Registrar, from the Deputy Vice-Chancellor and
Provost; Deans of Faculty; Programme Leaders and Programme Area
Leaders; and Student Wellbeing and Support on any such matters before
advising the appropriate Assessment Board. Decisions on the progression or
continuing enrolment of any student or recommendations for the conferment of
academic awards are the ultimate responsibility of the Progression and Award
Boards (PABs).

3.12 Extenuating Circumstances
1.

Action relating to extenuating circumstances must be taken strictly in
accordance with the relevant Student Regulations, as set out in Section 4 of
this Framework. Extenuating circumstances are circumstances that lessen or
mitigate the apparent seriousness of academic failure. Typically, they include
illness, close family bereavement and severe emotional stress. They are
temporary, abnormal and mostly unexpected circumstances that are beyond
the student’s control and that relate to a particular assessment or
assessments. They are claimed by an individual student (or by Student
Wellbeing and Support on behalf of the student) and are appropriately verified

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Assessment Regulations & Procedures: page 12 of 25

through the Extenuating Circumstances process (see Section 4 of this
Framework).
2.

The Registry and Programme Support Office will decide the validity or
otherwise of claims for extenuating circumstances. No other body and no
individual member of staff is authorised to rule on the validity or otherwise of a
claim for extenuating circumstances. A Module Assessment Board or
Progression and Award Board can only take extenuating circumstances into
account if they have been authorised by the Registry and Programme Support
Office.

3.

The Registry and Programme Support office will notify the Module
Assessment Boards that Valid Extenuating Circumstances apply to named
students in specific assessments in named modules.

4.

Module Assessment Boards must, where Valid Extenuating Circumstances
have prevented the student from submitting an assessment by the due date,
waive the assessment penalty and ensure the assessment attracts the full
mark it justifies on its merits alone.

5.

In other cases of Valid Extenuating Circumstances, where no mark is recorded
for an assessment, Module Assessment Boards may:
•

permit the assessment of the module in the form of the affected
assessment(s) to be deferred until specified dates. Deferred assessments
will normally involve new assessment tasks (e.g. new essay title).

•

exceptionally, if it is not possible to replicate the original assessment
mode/s, permit the assessment of the module by means of different
assessment mode/s, which must be defined and made known to the
student, to be deferred until specified dates.

6.

In relation to any assessment, an assessment penalty imposed following
Academic Misconduct and Student Misconduct Procedures described in
Section 14 and Section 15 of this Framework overrides any valid extenuating
circumstances.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Assessment Regulations & Procedures: page 13 of 25

7.

The Module Assessment Board will minute all decisions reached in respect of
valid extenuating circumstances made known to it.

8.

Chairs of Module Assessment Boards must ensure that "v" appears after each
element of assessment on the module mark sheets where extenuating
circumstances have been found valid whether or not the module has been
passed. If the module pass mark has not been reached, the appropriate
annotation will be applied.

9.

Module Assessment Boards make recommendations to the Progression and
Award Board concerning students with failed modules and/or modules in
which the assessment is deferred. Chairs of those Boards must ensure that
notations appear after each module score on the module mark sheet where
resit/deferred assessment is recommended.
The notations will appear on lists made available to the Progression and
Award Board. If the Module Assessment Board has waived a penalty for late
submission of coursework, the “v” annotation remains, but no
coursework/exam annotation is added.

3.13 Viva Voce Examinations
1.

The University does not permit the use of viva voce examinations to determine
an individual student's marks or to make recommendations for awards, unless
such an examination is specified in the module descriptor as a method of
assessment for all students on that module.

2.

In such cases, the Dean of Faculty will make all arrangements, with both the
External Examiner(s) and the students for the viva voce examination.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Assessment Regulations & Procedures: page 14 of 25

3.14 Progression and Award Boards (PABs) - General
1.

The Progression and Award Board confirms all module overall grades,
oversees the assessment of awards, decides on student progression and
makes recommendations to Senate, or to another awarding body, on the
award and category of award to be conferred upon individual students.

2.

All named awards shall be assigned to the authority of a Progression and
Award Board.

3.

The Progression and Award Board shall convene meetings, to discharge the
duties defined by these regulations. The Academic Registrar shall schedule its
meetings.

4.

The Progression and Award Board shall exercise its powers in accordance
with the standard of the award, the identified aims and objectives of any
particular programme and the individual candidate’s overall performance.

5.

Only a Progression and Award Board constituted in accordance with these
Regulations shall be authorised to recommend conferment on a student of an
academic award of the University, or of any awarding body with which the
University has a collaborative agreement.

6.

The University’s academic awards are conferred by the Progression and
Award Board by way of delegated authority from the University Senate. The
Progression and Award Board will also make recommendations to other
awarding bodies with which the University has a collaborative agreement on
Senate’s behalf.

7.

The decisions of the Progression and Award Board with regard to academic
awards shall be ratified by the Academic Registrar, in their ex-officio role as
Secretary of Senate.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Assessment Regulations & Procedures: page 15 of 25

3.15 Progression and Award Boards (PABs) - Constitution,
Terms of Reference and Membership
1.

The following have membership rights of Progression and Award Boards:
•

Chair

•

Progression and Award Board External Examiner(s) for awards under
consideration

•

Chairs or a nominee of the Module Assessment Boards relevant to the
PAB

•

Academic Registrar or nominated deputy

Additional staff may attend at the discretion of the Academic Registrar.
2.

The Chair is appointed on the authority of Senate and is accountable to
Senate for ensuring that the Progression and Award Board fulfils its
responsibilities in accordance with these regulations. The Academic Registrar
or nominee will advise and assist the Chair in this respect.

3.

No student may be a member of a Progression and Award Board, unless they
are a member of staff or approved External Examiner who is coincidentally
registered as a student on another programme in the University or elsewhere.

4.

The Progression and Award Board, when recommending the conferment of an
academic award or considering the progression of students, shall be quorate
with the following membership:
•

Chair or nominated deputy

•

Progression and Award Board External Examiner(s) for awards under
consideration

•

Chairs or a nominee of the Module Assessment Boards relevant to the
PAB

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Assessment Regulations & Procedures: page 16 of 25

•

Academic Registrar or nominee.

If, exceptionally, a MAB Chair is unable to attend, the Board will be quorate
provided that the Dean of Faculty has ensured that someone is present at the
Board to represent students on all programmes in their Faculty.
5.

The role of the Progression and Award Board External Examiner and the
associated rights and responsibilities are described in the Handbook for
External Examiners and Moderators. If, exceptionally, the Progression and
Award Board External Examiner is unable to attend the meeting, and the
University is unable to arrange for one of the External Examiners for modules
contributing to one or more of the awards to attend, then the Progression and
Award Board External Examiner will:
•

as far as possible, make their views known to the Board before it meets.

•

after the Board has met, write to the Chair of the Progression and Award
Board stating the reason for absence, the extent of their involvement with
the processes of assessment and signifying satisfaction with them. The
letter shall not be considered to signify agreement with every decision of
the Progression and Award Board.

•

the minutes of the meeting will record the Chair’s agreement that the
meeting should go ahead.

6.

In circumstances beyond the University’s control where it is not possible to
convene a normally constituted Progression and Award Board, the ViceChancellor, on advice from the Academic Registrar, will determine the
arrangements necessary to conduct business of the meeting. In such
circumstances, the decision and the reasons for it will be reported in full to the
next meeting of Senate.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Assessment Regulations & Procedures: page 17 of 25

3.16 Progression and Award Boards (PABs) - Process and
Powers
1.

The Progression and Award Board will receive:
•

the minutes of its previous meeting and any intervening sub-committee(s).

•

notification of any actions taken under the delegation of its authority at a
previous meeting.

•

the relevant regulations, policies and procedures.

•

the recommended marks and assigned credit from the appropriate Module
Assessment Board(s) for each student registered for awards for which it is
responsible.

•

decisions made by Module Assessment Board(s) with regard to failure and
deferral.

•

a record against each module of Extenuating Circumstances found Valid
by The Registry and Programme Support Office with an indication of action
that remains to be taken.

•

the name of any student alleged to have been guilty of academic
misconduct in relation to a module and details of any action taken in
relation to it.

•

the annual report(s) of the Progression and Award Board External
Examiner(s).

•

the name of any student in breach of University regulations from whom an
official transcript/certificate will be withheld.

2.

The Progression and Award Board will:
•

before making decisions about any students, agree how it should exercise
discretion with regard to extenuating circumstances and other factors
affecting performance.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Assessment Regulations & Procedures: page 18 of 25

•

agree the final version of the minutes of the previous meeting to be a true
record of that meeting and note any matters arising from them.

•

note any actions taken under authority delegated at its previous meetings.

•

exercise its discretion to condone failure in accordance with the provisions
of these regulations.

•

in the event of Extenuating Circumstances having been found Valid that
have not otherwise been completed, exercise discretion as appropriate in
accordance with the provisions of those and other regulations.

•

determine whether to permit a student to progress to the next stage of a
programme.

•

determine whether any student shall be excluded from their programme of
study on academic grounds.

•

determine whether to allow any student to make good an initial failure in
one or more modules by resit assessment.

•

determine whether to allow any student to make good an initial failure in
one or more modules by repeat assessment of the module.

•

subject to the constraints of these regulations, require a student to repeat
the assessment of a module where the resit requirements have not been
successfully completed.

•

determine whether a candidate’s registration should be extended beyond
the application of these or other University regulations.

•

recommend the conferment and, as appropriate, categorisation of an
award, including, as appropriate, an Aegrotat award.

•

determine whether or not to defer recommending progression or the
conferment of an award until specified conditions, within a specified time
scale, have been met.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Assessment Regulations & Procedures: page 19 of 25

•

authorise the publication of its decisions and recommendations.

•

consider the previous annual report/s of the Progression and Award Board
External Examiner(s) and the response to it, including a rationale for any
recommendations that have not been acted upon, and refer any matters of
concern to Senate.

•

fulfil, as appropriate, any specific and additional requirements of any
external accrediting body for the award recognised by Senate.

3.17 Progression and Award Boards (PABs) - Decisions
1.

At the conclusion of each meeting the Chair shall sign a list of the decisions of
the Progression and Award Board. The Minutes Secretary will then release the
decisions in accordance with the approved Assessments Calendar.

2.

The list shall show the name and/or Student Record System Identification
Number of each student and the decision of the Progression and Award
Board. The decision shall be one of the following:
•

Progress: this confirms that the student may continue to the next stage of
the programme and, if appropriate, has been permitted to carry forward a
module or modules for which credit has not yet been assigned.

•

Recommend the award of [name of specific award]: this confirms that
an academic award is to be made to the student following, as appropriate,
completion of the programme of study, withdrawal or exclusion.

•

Decision Deferred: this confirms either that there is insufficient information
on which to make a decision or that, due to Valid Extenuating
Circumstances, the student has not yet been awarded sufficient credit to
progress or secure an award. Such deferral may be in addition to a
decision to allow resit assessment. The Progression and Award Board will
not make the decision ‘Decision Deferred’ following a resit if the timing of
any deferred resit would make normal progress impracticable (see Section

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Assessment Regulations & Procedures: page 20 of 25

3.16.2 of this Framework). Instead it will allow the student to repeat the
assessment of the outstanding modules and will determine whether or not
the student may progress before completion of the repeat assessment (see
also Section 5 of this Framework).
•

Resit: this confirms that further marks are to be confirmed, and credit
assigned, following an opportunity to make good an initial failure, before
progression can be determined or an award can be recommended. This
may be in addition to a decision of ‘Decision Deferred’.

•

Retake Module(s): this confirms that the student may not continue to the
next stage of the programme or be recommended for an award until there
has been a successful repeat assessment. Students must enrol to retake
module(s) and register for those modules in accordance with University
regulations. Unless the Progression and Award Board specifically states
otherwise, the student must complete all the assessments required in the
next delivery of the module and gain sufficient marks to pass the module.
The mark for the repeated module is capped at the module pass mark. See
also Section 6 of this Framework.

•

Exclude: this confirms that the student may not continue to study for the
named award for which they are registered at the University as a full-time
student. This decision does not prevent the student transferring their
registration to another programme of study within the University, subject to
the agreement of the Programme Leader/Programme Area Leader (s) for
that programme.

•

Decision Withheld: this confirms that one of the above decisions has
been determined but that it is not to be released yet by way of an official
transcript/certificate. This is either because the student is in breach of the
University’s regulations in some respect or has not yet decided whether or
not to accept the offer of an award prior to its recommendation. The
Decision is released by subsequent Chair’s Action.

3.

The Academic Registrar shall ensure that, as soon as practicable after the
Board, students have sufficient further details of the Board’s decisions to

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Assessment Regulations & Procedures: page 21 of 25

exercise their rights under these and any other regulations of the University. In
particular, those further details must make clear any actions the student must
complete in order to retrieve any failure.
4.

At the end of the meeting, the Progression and Award Board External
Examiner will approve the Board Papers. This endorsement signifies that the
External Examiner upholds the effectiveness and adequacy of the assessment
processes, with particular reference to the student profiles and issues of
fairness. It does not necessarily indicate agreement with every individual mark
or recommendation of the Board.

3.18 Progression and Award Boards (PABs) - Delegation
1.

The Progression and Award Board can delegate to a subsidiary body its
authority in relation to the progression of, and recommendation of awards to,
students following resit assessment. It must define the membership and
quorum of such a subsidiary body and prescribe the reporting arrangements to
the Board.

2.

The Progression and Award Board can delegate to the Chair its authority in
relation to the progression and recommendation of awards to students arising
from deferred decisions and the release of withheld decisions. It shall require
the Chair to document their decision, the reasons for it, and the extent of any
consultation. The Chair shall report any such decision to the next meeting of
the Board.

3.

The Progression and Award Board can delegate to the Chair its authority in
relation to the outcome of successful appeals (see Section 16 of this
Framework). The Chair shall report any such decision to the next meeting of
the Board.

4.

The Progression and Award Board cannot delegate its authority in any other
way.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Assessment Regulations & Procedures: page 22 of 25

3.19 Progression and Award Boards (PABs) - Minutes
1.

The Academic Registrar shall appoint a Minutes Secretary to draft the minutes
of the meeting of the Board and of any sub-committee.

2.

In the case of the exercise of the discretionary powers described below, the
minutes must include all the information specified within that regulation. In the
case of the exercise of any other discretionary powers under these
regulations, the minutes shall record in full the reasons for any decision to
exercise discretion or not to do so.

3.

The Chair of the Progression and Award Board shall ensure that approved
draft minutes of meetings are issued to members within a reasonable time.
The Progression and Award Board will receive and consider the minutes of its
previous meeting as described in Section 3.16 of this Framework.

3.20 Authority to Depart Exceptionally from University
Regulations
1.

Within the constraints of the programme objectives and good practice within
the UK higher education sector, the Progression and Award Board may depart
from any of these regulations, except this regulation, in exceptional
circumstances if a strict application of the regulations would be unjust to a
student or students. The Progression and Award Board will take advice from
the Progression and Award Board External Examiner in relation to good
practice in the sector.

2.

In such a case the minutes must record all of the following information:
•

a reference to this regulation.

•

the name of the student(s).

•

the regulation from which the Progression and Award Board wishes to
depart.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Assessment Regulations & Procedures: page 23 of 25

•

the full circumstances in which the Progression and Award Board
considered it necessary to exercise the discretionary power under this
regulation.

•

the reason the Progression and Award Board considered it necessary to
exercise the discretionary power under this regulation - this should
highlight the consequences of the exercise or non-exercise of such
discretion for the student.

•

the advice of the Progression and Award Board External Examiner in
relation to good practice within the UK higher education sector.

•

the reason such discretionary power should not be exercised in respect of
other students.

The Chair of the Progression and Award Board should report in writing via its
Minutes Secretary to both the Vice-Chancellor and Academic Registrar
regarding the departure from the regulations, so that this can be reported to
Senate.

3.21 Other Procedural Matters
1.

The Academic Registrar will retain electronic copies of mark sheets.

2.

All members of a Progression and Award Board or Module Assessment Board
must exercise the strictest confidentiality regarding its proceedings. Board
decisions are the decisions of all its members jointly and severally, regardless
of the members’ views before those decisions were finalised.

3.

The Academic Registrar is responsible for communicating the decisions of
Assessment Boards and issuing statements relating to appeal procedures.
Candidates whose results are not published by the deadline for procedural
reasons will be notified separately at the same time. They will also retain
award lists and details of Chair’s actions taken after the PAB meeting.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Assessment Regulations & Procedures: page 24 of 25

Document Title

Plymouth Marjon University Student
Regulations Framework – Section 3
Assessment Regulations and Procedures

Document Reference

L:\Student Regulations Framework\Student
Regulations Framework 2025-26

Version

3.12

Issuing Authority

Senate

Custodian

Academic Standards Officer

Document Date

16th October 2009

Last Amended

16th July 2025

Sensitivity

Unclassified

Circulation

Website

Effective from

September 2025

Review Date

Ongoing

Effective until

September 2026

History

Updated annually and subject to routine ongoing
revision.

Equality Impact Assessment

Preliminary EIA conducted for SRF, December
2010. Updated Equality Analysis Form to be
submitted.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Assessment Regulations & Procedures: page 25 of 25

4.

EXTENUATING CIRCUMSTANCES
This section of the Student Regulations Framework applies to all taught
programmes of Plymouth Marjon University, whether undergraduate or
postgraduate, and to all apprentices enrolled on the University’s
apprenticeship programmes, who are classified as ‘students’ and referred to
accordingly throughout this Procedure.

4.1

Introduction

1.

Students must undertake a wide range of assessments in different formats.
This requires them to balance their workload and use time management
skills to ensure that assessments are submitted to stated deadlines.
However, the University recognises that serious adverse factors beyond a
student’s control (extenuating circumstances) can prevent them from
completing assessments. This procedure enables them to be taken into
account when considering a student’s assessment profile.

4.2

Definition

1.

Extenuating circumstances are defined as circumstances which are outside
the control of the student and negatively affect performance. Students and
staff should follow these procedures where circumstances are:
•

Severe: the event or circumstance must have had a serious impact on
assessment performance

•

Unexpected: the student must have had no prior knowledge that a
particular event would occur

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Extenuating Circumstances: page 1 of 16

•

Unpreventable: there must have been no reasonable steps that the
student could have taken to prevent the event or circumstance from
occurring

•

Relevant: the event or circumstances must have occurred at the time of
the assessment or during the period immediately leading up to the
assessment date

•

Corroborated: the claim must meet any requirements for independent
documentary evidence outlined in the Extenuating Circumstances
guidance

Students may experience immediate events that prevent them from
attending, or submitting, an assessment, and/or preliminary events that
impact on their ability to prepare for an assessment.

2.

The aim of these procedures is to:
•

ensure that students are appropriately supported when extenuating
circumstances are brought to the attention of the University in a timely
manner

•

ensure that all students are treated fairly and equitably in the light of
extenuating circumstances

•

outline the responsibilities of students in informing the University of
circumstances which are affecting their performance

•

protect the academic integrity of programmes for all students

•

make clear the types of serious adverse factors that the University will
consider as extenuating circumstances

3.

Students can download the Extenuating Circumstances Claim Form and find
related guidance in the Registry Documents section on MyMarjon. All forms
should be submitted to the Extenuating Circumstances team by the

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Extenuating Circumstances: page 2 of 16

published deadlines and should be accompanied by documentary evidence
where required. Decisions are emailed to students within 48 hours where
possible, however in busier periods this may extend to within one week.

4.3

Examples of Extenuating Circumstances

1.

The University considers the following to be examples of extenuating
circumstances, but this list is not exhaustive, and other circumstances are
considered appropriate so long as circumstances meet the definition above:
•

The death or serious illness of a close family member, friend, or partner

•

Serious short-term illness or injury that is impacting a student’s ability to
study

•

Worsening of an ongoing illness or disability - including mental health
conditions

•

Significant personal or family crisis directly affecting the student

•

Witnessing, or involvement in, a traumatic incident

•

Statutory parental leave

•

Court attendance, jury service, other public/civic duty or obligation

•

Competing in sport or participation in other activity at national or
international level.

2.

These procedures are intended to apply to individuals. They do not apply
when a failure in programme management arrangements has disrupted the
learning and assessment of a group or groups of students. In such cases,
the Dean of Faculty and the programme team should provide appropriate
remedies, taking advice from the Academic Registrar. If those remedies are
unsatisfactory, students may use the complaints procedure at Section 17 of
this Framework.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Extenuating Circumstances: page 3 of 16

4.4

Extenuating Circumstances Not Considered To Be Valid

1.

Extenuating circumstances cover critical incidences and do not encompass
normal life challenges. The following circumstances are not considered
extenuating by the University, although the University has services in place
which can support and advise students who are dealing with some of the
difficulties indicated below:
•

A medical condition, medical circumstances or disability for which no
supporting evidence has been presented

•

Any circumstances for which appropriate adjustments have already been
made by the University and where there is no evidence of a worsening of
the condition which requires further consideration

•

Assessment-related stress which is not diagnosed as an illness or
discussed with Student Wellbeing and Support

•

An illness occurring after an examination/in-class test or the deadline for
submission of coursework

•

A minor illness such as a cough or cold

•

Pregnancy, except for morning sickness or a period of three weeks
immediately preceding the due date, and except for complications
relating to the pregnancy which medical evidence can substantiate

•

Poor working practice such as:
o the student’s failure to back up electronic documents regularly and
securely
o

not acquainting themselves with the times, dates and places
where assessments were to be submitted or examinations to be
sat

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Extenuating Circumstances: page 4 of 16

o erroneous e-submission, including e-submission to an incorrect
module code
o poor time management during peaks in assessment work
demands
•

Problems with network facilities, personal computers or printers, unless a
student is unable to access campus. Faults associated with the VLE,
Turnitin or University-maintained network facilities preventing online
assessment submission will be managed in line with University policy

•

Where students are studying on a full-time basis, issues relating to paid
employment except in cases of work placements which contribute to the
programme of study

•

House moves, renovations or other routine, rather than emergency,
accommodation difficulties

•

Holidays, including attendance at marriages, festivals and like events

•

Financial difficulties

•

Additional learning needs

•

Complaints against individual members of staff, or complaints about the
delivery of the module/programme, which are managed through the
University’s Complaints Procedure (see Section 17 of this Framework).

4.5

Extenuating Circumstances and Valid Evidence

1.

The following general principles apply to the extenuating circumstances
procedure:
•

Extenuating circumstances cannot be valid for more than twenty working
days

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Extenuating Circumstances: page 5 of 16

•

Students whose circumstances exceed twenty working days must
discuss the matter with Student Wellbeing and Support so that they can
be supported or to discuss a possible interruption of studies

•

Evidence must include specific dates for the period of the claim and
should correspond with the dates recorded on the claim form

•

Extenuating Circumstances will not apply during the resit period

•

Retrospective Extenuating Circumstances will be limited to exceptional
circumstances only

•

Self-certification will not apply to exams

•

Extended Extenuating Circumstances will not apply to the resit period

•

Deferred assessment into the next academic year due to the approval of
an Extenuating Circumstance will be limited to one module per year.

2.

There are five categories of Extenuating Circumstances:
•

Self-Certification
o For circumstances of no more than five working days which include
the submission date
o This can be used once per Term/Semester and requires no evidence
o This gives an extension to the original deadline of five working days
for all coursework submitted electronically in line with University
requirements
o Presentations can be re-scheduled within the five working days at the
module leader’s discretion
or

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Extenuating Circumstances: page 6 of 16

o Will be deferred to the next resit session.
o Self certification does not apply to exams.
•

Standard ECs of six working days or more
o Can be claimed for University-defined acceptable circumstances of no
more than 20 working days, excluding weekends and Bank Holidays
o Appropriate evidence must be provided with the claim (see
Extenuating Circumstances Guidance)

•

Student Support Short-Term
o where DIAS submits a claim for Extenuating Circumstances on the
student’s behalf, when the student is known to them and has had an
exacerbation of a recorded existing condition
o No evidence is required.
o Can be used in the resit period in exceptional circumstances.

•

Student Wellbeing and Support Extended Term
o Where Student Wellbeing and Support can submit an Extended claim
for a student with known, long-term, circumstances that are having a
significant impact on the student’s ability to study
o Can be claimed for up to one academic year
o Evidence is discussed or provided to Student Wellbeing and Support
o Will be approved as the default status for all assessments during the
stated period so that multiple Extenuating Circumstance claims do not
have to be submitted throughout the year
o Students can submit assessments where they are able, which will
supersede the Extenuating Circumstance status.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Extenuating Circumstances: page 7 of 16

o Will not apply to the resit period.

•

Academic Module Assessment ECs
o To be claimed by the module leader on behalf of the module cohort
where there are circumstances impacting the delivery of an academic
course or placement
o Can be all or one or more element of the assessment

3.

A working day is defined as a day on which the University (or Partner
Institution) is open, so includes student vacation periods but excludes
weekends, Bank Holidays and other times that the University or Partner
Institution is closed, such as the period between Christmas and New Year.
For all valid EC claims, apart from Self-certification, this gives the option of
submitting within five working days of the original deadline or at the next resit
session. All work to be submitted electronically in line with University
requirements.

4.

To be fair and transparent, applications for extenuating circumstances must
be evidence-based and judged within clearly defined guidelines. This also
helps students who are not fit to undertake an assessment to understand the
nature of the evidence required. The supporting evidence required is stated
in the Extenuating Circumstances Guidance. Students should ask Student
Wellbeing and Support and/or the Extenuating Circumstances team for
advice on how to apply and their chances of success.

5.

Supporting evidence must refer directly to how the extenuating
circumstances have impacted upon the student’s ability to complete or sit
assessments on their scheduled due date.

6.

Corroborating evidence must:

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Extenuating Circumstances: page 8 of 16

•

be written by appropriately qualified professionals who are independent
to the student. Evidence from family and/or friends will not normally be
accepted.

•

be on headed paper and signed and dated by the author. Evidence
presented by email is acceptable if the email has been sent by the author
from the official domain name of the author's organisation.

•

confirm specifically that the circumstances were witnessed on the
relevant date as opposed to being reported retrospectively.

•

All evidence should be in English. Where, for example, a student is taken
ill in their home country and corroborating evidence is provided in the
language of that country, then it should be accompanied by a translation,
certified officially as being accurate as advised by the Extenuating
Circumstances team.

4.6

Serious and Confidential Extenuating Circumstances

1.

The University recognises that there are circumstances which may be
traumatic or extremely personal to a student. In these cases, the student
may seek the advice of Student Wellbeing and Support who will decide
whether or not the circumstances are both serious and confidential.

2.

If satisfied that the circumstance is valid, the member of staff will refer the
case to the Registry and Programme Support Office for direct approval
without the need for evidence or explanation to be supplied to the
Extenuating Circumstances team.

3.

Exceptionally, for example due to the incapacity of the student, written
statements on a student's behalf may be considered at the discretion of the
Academic Registrar. The student will need to consent to this, unless the
circumstances themselves have made it impossible for the student to give

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Extenuating Circumstances: page 9 of 16

consent, and the submission must make it clear how that consent has been
given.
4.

5.

A request must be made in writing, detailing:
•

the intervention involved

•

the reasons for its consideration

•

the module assessment affected and submission dates

The student will receive a notification that the Extenuating Circumstances
have been approved.

4.7

Timing of an Extenuating Circumstances Submission

1.

Extenuating circumstances claims must normally be made by the end of the
semester or term to which they relate. Submissions that relate to years
already completed will not be considered.

2.

Deadlines for the submission of completed forms and evidence are
published annually via the Assessments Calendar. However, students
should submit claims as early as possible and by no later than the published
deadline, particularly with regard to major assessment tasks such as
dissertations, so that a decision can be made promptly.

4.8

Misrepresentation and Falsehood

1.

By submitting a claim, students certify that the information they have
provided is true and complete, and that misrepresentation or falsehood
related to extenuating circumstances may lead to the application of the
Student Misconduct Procedures. The Extenuating Circumstances procedure
is intended to be supportive, and claims will be treated in good faith by

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Extenuating Circumstances: page 10 of 16

University staff. Students are encouraged to seek advice from Student
Wellbeing and Support or the Extenuating Circumstances team if they have
any queries about a claim.

4.9

Data Protection Act 2018

1.

By submitting an extenuating circumstances form, students agree to the
University holding this personal data in accordance with its Records
Retention Policy and its obligations under the Data Protection Act 2018,
which aligns with the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR).

4.10 Support for Students
1.

Plymouth Marjon University places great emphasis on supporting its
students. The University recognises that students who have recourse to
these procedures may require additional support. Students are therefore
encouraged to seek advice from Student Wellbeing and Support which
includes professional counsellors; from their Personal Development Tutor; or
from the Student Union.

2.

During their studies students may also experience personal issues that
hamper their ability to learn, or undertake assessments, but do not meet the
criteria for extenuating circumstances. In all such cases students should
contact those identified above.

4.11 Procedures at Partner Organisations
1.

All arrangements on collaborative programmes relating to extenuating
circumstances are expected to align with those of the University.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Extenuating Circumstances: page 11 of 16

2.

All decisions relating to Extenuating Circumstances will be conveyed to the
University’s Extenuating Circumstances team to be recorded on the students’
records.

4.12 The ‘Fit to Sit’ Principle
1.

The University operates a ‘fit to sit’ approach to extenuating circumstances.
This acknowledges that only the individual student concerned, with advice
from others where appropriate, can know if an event has impacted upon their
ability to undertake an assessment. A student confirms that they are ‘fit to sit’
by submitting an assessment or sitting an examination and a subsequent
claim will only be considered in exceptional circumstances, where a student
is shown to have been unable to reasonably make the required judgement.

2.

It follows that students should only try to meet learning outcomes when they
are fully fit to do so. The Extenuating Circumstances team will not judge the
impact of particular circumstances on any individual but will either accept that
the evidence presented by the student meets the criteria or that it does not. If
it does not, the claim will be rejected.

3.

The Extenuating Circumstances decisions are used to inform the Module
Assessment Board that deals with the relevant module. Where there are
valid extenuating circumstances, Module Assessment Boards must waive the
assessment penalty for late submission, provided the work was submitted
within ten working days of the due date of submission, and ensure the
assessment attracts the full mark it merits. Students may not submit an
additional Extenuating Circumstances claim within this period to extend the
time further, but this deadline may be varied exceptionally by the Academic
Registrar.

4.

Where a student cannot submit the assessment within five working days but
has valid Extenuating Circumstances, so that no attained mark is recorded
for an assessment, Module Assessment Boards will record an interim mark

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Extenuating Circumstances: page 12 of 16

and annotation. If no work is submitted within the five working days for a
Self-Certification EC claim, a Fail with no submission will be recorded against
the assessment.
5.

The Progression and Award Board:
•

will permit the assessment of the module in the form of the affected
assessment(s) to be deferred until specified dates, usually the next
available assessment period for that module. Deferred assessments will
normally involve new assessment tasks (e.g. new essay title).

•

may exceptionally, if the same type of assessment mode(s) cannot be
used again, permit a different assessment mode(s), which must be
defined and made known to the student, to be deferred until specified
dates. Some assessments (for example, some professional placements)
must be repeated exactly and may not, therefore, be available in defined
resit/deferral periods. Students will be informed about such assessments
in the programme handbook.

4.13 Extenuating Circumstances Appeal Process
1.

A student who is dissatisfied with any aspect of the Extenuating
Circumstances application process or decision should contact the
University’s Extenuating Circumstances team (or, for Partner institutions,
their Extenuating Circumstances team) in the first instance, as an informal
resolution of their appeal may be possible. If the student is dissatisfied with
the informal response, then they may write formally to the Registry and
Programme Support Office, within twenty working days of receipt of the
notification of the informal response. Complaints against individual members
of staff are managed by the People Team; complaints about the delivery of
the module/programme are managed through the University’s Complaints
Procedure (see Section 17 of this Framework).

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Extenuating Circumstances: page 13 of 16

2.

The letter or e-mail should be entitled ‘Extenuating Circumstances Appeal’
and should clearly state the reasons for the student’s dissatisfaction,
including any information that they feel has not been considered. The appeal
should include new information about the Extenuating Circumstances claim
that was not available at the time of the decision.

3.

If the formal response does not resolve the complaint, the student may
appeal against the decision in writing to the Academic Registrar.

4.

The Academic Registrar and a member of Senate will convene as an
Adjudication Panel to investigate the appeal. The Panel’s decisions will be
determined by the nature of the circumstances, the documentary evidence
provided and the alignment with the requirements of Section 4.5 of this
Framework. Where the Adjudication Panel deems an appeal to be without
adequate substantiating evidence, they may decide to reject it without further
discussion.

5.

The Panel meets as soon as is practicable to consider additional evidence
and agree the outcome of a claim.

6.

The appellant will be advised of the Panel’s decision in writing within ten
working days. If it decides that an Extenuating Circumstances claim is not
valid, the reasons for this will be stated. The decision will be copied to the
Academic Standards Officer, so that a Completion of Procedures letter can
be issued to the appellant on request.

7.

The Panel’s decisions inform the Module Assessment Boards and
Progression and Award Boards. Academic appeals can only be made on the
grounds set out in the academic appeals process described in Section 16 of
this Framework.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Extenuating Circumstances: page 14 of 16

4.14 Office of the Independent Adjudicator for Higher Education
1.

If an appellant remains dissatisfied after the appropriate internal processes
have been exhausted, they can ask the University to issue a Completion of
Procedures letter in order for the Office of the Independent Adjudicator for
Higher Education (OIA) to review their appeal.

2.

The University must issue a Completion of Procedures letter in order for the
OIA to review an appeal. A Completion of Procedures letter will be issued to
an appellant on request. If a Completion of Procedures letter is issued before
the adjudication stage has been conducted, the letter will make it clear that
the student has not completed the University’s internal processes.

3.

All requests for review must be made to the OIA within twelve months of the
date of issue of a Completion of Procedures letter. For full details please
contact http://www.oiahe.org.uk.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Extenuating Circumstances: page 15 of 16

Document Title

Plymouth Marjon University Student
Regulations Framework – Section 4
Extenuating Circumstances

Document Reference

L:\Student Regulations Framework\Student
Regulations Framework 2025-26

Version

3.15

Issuing Authority

Senate

Custodian

Academic Standards Officer

Document Date

16th October 2009

Last Amended

16th July 2025

Sensitivity

Unclassified

Circulation

Website

Effective from

September 2025

Review Date

Ongoing

Effective until

September 2026

History

Updated annually and subject to routine ongoing
revision, as well as extensive revision in
September 2021.

Equality Impact Assessment

Preliminary EIA conducted for SRF, December
2010. Updated Equality Analysis Form to be
submitted.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Extenuating Circumstances: page 16 of 16

5.

PROGRESSION
This section of the Student Regulations Framework applies to all taught
programmes of Plymouth Marjon University, whether undergraduate or
postgraduate, and to all apprentices enrolled on the University’s degree
apprenticeship programmes, who are classified as ‘students’ and referred to
accordingly throughout this Procedure.

5.1

Points of Progression

1.

Programmes of study leading to named awards may be divided into stages
(see Section 1.4 of this Framework) separated by points of progression.

2.

Unless specifically stated otherwise in the approved Programme Specification,
points of progression will occur on the first day of the next semester or term to
start after the meeting of the Progression and Award Board following the
completion of study at a particular stage.

3.

Where a placement, or other student experience, occurs across two stages of
a programme, and its successful completion is a condition of the conferment of
the award, the Progression and Award Board will determine where the point of
progression lies. The Progression and Award Board may also determine the
point of progression differently according to a student’s circumstances. If it
does so, the minutes shall record in each case the Board’s reasons for so
determining the point of progression.

5.2

Progression of Individual Students

1.

Responsibility for all decisions relating to progression rests with the
Progression and Award Board.

2.

The Progression and Award Board will consider each student’s overall
performance at the first meeting following the student’s completion of the
study of each stage. If a student has obtained the credit required to complete

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Progression: page 1 of 4

that stage, including credit in all compulsory modules, the Board will permit
him or her to progress to the next stage. This can be following condonement,
resit, and/or repeat assessment.
3.

On the authority of the Chair of the Progression and Award Board, a student
may commence the study of a module or modules at the next stage before the
Progression and Award Board has met to consider the results of the
assessment of modules at the preceding stage. This will include the results of
any referral or repeat assessment. However, a Module Assessment Board
may not assign credit for a module or modules at any stage until the
Progression and Award Board has confirmed that the student has been
permitted to progress to that stage.

4.

The Progression and Award Board, before or after any resit, may permit a
student to progress to the next stage of a programme, where applicable to that
programme. They can do so trailing failure in the assessment of one 20 credit
module or two 10 credit modules, as long as they have attempted the
assessment of the module, and a mark is recorded either before or after any
resit. This failure must be retrieved in accordance with the provisions for
repeating modules in Section 6 of this Framework and this provision is not
applicable to students on accelerated degrees. Students must have also
obtained an average module mark of 50% across the previous stage.
Exceptionally, students may be permitted to trail failure in the assessment of a
40-credit dissertation or honours level project, at the discretion of the
Progression and Award Board, as an alternative to retaking the stage in its
entirety.

5.

Students can only trail failure in the assessment of modules at the previous
level/stage, thus preventing the trailing of Level 4 (Stage 1) modules into Level
6 (Stage 3) or the trailing of Level 5 (Stage 2) modules into Level 7 (Stage 4)
of an Integrated Master’s programme.

6.

As an alternative, not an addition, to the standard provision, a student
registered on a professionally accredited degree programme may progress to
the academic work of the next year of the programme if they have failed or

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Progression: page 2 of 4

been deferred in a placement module. However, they will then need to pass
that module at the time set aside for placement learning in the next session.
Arrangements may then be made for the next level placement to be
postponed to the following year. If a student fails to complete a deferred or
resit placement satisfactorily, they will be required either to interrupt their
programme until they are able to satisfy the outstanding requirements or
transfer onto an alternative programme of study.
6.

Progression with trailing failure requires the Progression and Award Board to
specify the modules to be taken to make good the failure and the time by
which the assessment must be completed. Successful retrieval of this failure
becomes part of the progression or award requirement of the next stage of the
programme of study.

7.

A student may be allowed to progress without sufficient credit, if an
assessment has been deferred, and gain the necessary credit through
assessment in modules where credit has not yet been assigned. The
Progression and Award Board will decide the maximum shortfall of credit but,
if the workload is manageable, a student will normally be allowed to progress.

8.

If a student undertakes assessments and/or is awarded credit for prior
learning such that the minimum required for progression is exceeded, the
Progression and Award Board will, firstly, take account of the student's
performance in all compulsory modules and then the student's best
performance in optional modules up to the total required.

9.

Specific requirements might apply to professionally accredited programmes,
such as healthcare provision, which prevent the trailing of any module, and
these will be made known to students where applicable.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Progression: page 3 of 4

Document Title

Plymouth Marjon University Student
Regulations Framework - Section 5 Progression

Document Reference

L:\Student Regulations Framework\Student
Regulations Framework 2025-26

Version

3.13

Issuing Authority

Senate

Custodian

Academic Standards Officer

Document Date

16th October 2009

Last Amended

25th March 2025

Sensitivity

Unclassified

Circulation

Website

Effective from

September 2025

Review Date

Ongoing

Effective until

September 2026

History

Updated annually: subject to minor revision, April
2020 and January 2023.

Equality Impact Assessment

Preliminary EIA conducted for SRF, December
2010. Updated Equality Analysis Form to be
submitted.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Progression: page 4 of 4

6.

RETRIEVAL OF FAILURE
NB - for details of fees relating to each of these retrieval processes, please
refer to the University website.
This section of the Student Regulations Framework applies to all taught
programmes of Plymouth Marjon University, whether undergraduate or
postgraduate, and to all apprentices enrolled on the University’s
apprenticeship programmes, who are classified as ‘students’ and referred to
accordingly throughout this Procedure.

6.1

Retrieval of Failure - Undergraduate Condonement

1.

At each stage of assessment, Progression and Award Boards for
undergraduate programmes will award credit for failed modules up to a
maximum of 20 credits if all of the following conditions are met:


the module is not listed in the Programme Specification as a module that
cannot be condoned (but see Section 6.1.7 of this Framework below)



the full range of marks is available to the Board (which specifically means
that condonement cannot be granted if the student has no mark or a
partial mark for a particular module(s) perhaps because of extenuating
circumstances)



the average mark per credit for that stage (including the failing mark) is
40% or more



the module has not been the subject of a confirmed instance of academic
misconduct



the student has attempted the assessment(s) of the module and has
achieved a mark of between 30% and 39% (or 40% and 49% for an
Integrated Masters Programme where Level 7 modules are studied, in
addition to Level 6, at stage 3).

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Retrieval of Failure: page 1 of 10

The actual marks achieved for a condoned module will be recorded for
classification purposes so that the student bears the consequences of their
achievement in the module.
2.

If more than 20 credits fall in the condonable range, the Progression and
Award Board will not condone any of the modules.

3.

The principle of condonement applies to marks attained in resits, retakes and
deferred assessments, provided the conditions in Section 6.1.1 of this
Framework for the relevant stage are met.

4.

Condonement applied at one stage does not preclude condonement being
applied in any or all subsequent stages.

5.

Any transcript will show the actual mark achieved and will indicate that the
credits have been gained by condonement.

6.

If the module will not count towards the classification of a final award, the
Progression and Award Board may condone the module without offering a
resit opportunity.

7.

All modules are condonable, unless there are specific requirements relating to
external accreditation.

6.2

Retrieval of Failure – Postgraduate Condonement

1.

The Progression and Award Board for a taught postgraduate programme will
condone marks for a module in the 40% - 49% range for the purposes of
awarding credit, in accordance with 6.2.2 below.

2.

Condonement decisions can only be made, once a student has been given the
opportunity to resit for a 50% mark in the first instance, on the basis of a
credit-weighted mean mark of at least 50% obtained across the requisite
number of credits for the qualification being considered for award.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Retrieval of Failure: page 2 of 10

3.

Modules for which condonement will not be allowed must be listed in the
programme specification and made known to students at the start of each
programme.

4.

The credit-weighted mean mark calculated for classification purposes must
use marks in their original form.

5.

The limits of condonement are as follows:
•

For the award of a Master’s degree, 30 credits

•

For the award of a Postgraduate Diploma, 30 credits

•

For the award of a Professional Graduate Certificate in Education (PGCE),
30 credits

•
6.

For the award of a Postgraduate Certificate, 15 credits.

Condonement will not be permitted where the module has been the subject of
a confirmed instance of academic misconduct.

6.3

Retrieval of Failure – Resit and Deferral

1.

The University defines a resit as a second attempt, following initial failure, at
the assessment of a module, for a maximum module mark of the module pass
mark (normally 40% for undergraduate modules and 50% for postgraduate
modules), without the requirement to repeat any attendance. A resit will cover
only the failed assessment, rather than requiring reassessment of the entire
module.

2.

The University defines a deferral as an attempt at the assessment of a
module, following failure which is the subject of a valid claim of extenuating
circumstances, for an uncapped mark, without the requirement to repeat any
attendance. In accredited programmes requiring students to pass all
assessment components, if not all elements were attempted, the resit mark for

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Retrieval of Failure: page 3 of 10

the module will remain uncapped provided that all other assessment
components in the first attempt were successfully passed.
3.

The Progression and Award Board will determine the period during which resit
and deferral assessments must be attempted.

4.

When the period determined by the Progression and Award Board has
expired, the right to retrieve failure by resit or deferral assessment also
expires, unless the Progression and Award Board determines that, because of
valid extenuating circumstances, the period should be extended.

5.

Immediately following the publication of results determined by Progression
and Award Boards, the Academic Registrar will ensure that candidates who
have failed to satisfy the requirements for progression or an award are
informed through a secure webpage.

6.

Deans of Faculty will ensure that resit assessment tasks and deferral
requirements are published on the University’s Virtual Learning Environment
at the start of the academic year for all modules.

7.

Resit and deferral assessments must assess the learning outcomes of the
module in a similar manner and mode to the original assessment. Resit and
deferred assessments will normally involve new assessment tasks (e.g. new
essay title) rather than revisions of previously submitted work. However, in the
case of an honours project or a reflective piece of assessment, students may
be allowed to revise and resubmit their original work.

8.

Resit and deferral assessments should ensure that principles of academic
integrity are upheld.

9.

In setting resit and deferral assessments, Module Assessment Boards should
take into account that, on resit or deferral, students must pass every
element of assessment the Board has set for their retrieval of failure.
Specifically, resit marks cannot be combined with existing marks from passed
elements, nor with each other, so that a module pass mark results.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Retrieval of Failure: page 4 of 10

10.

Module Leaders must nominate an alternative contact, to be communicated to
resit or deferral candidates, if they are to be absent from the University at any
point during the first two weeks after results are published.

11.

Deans of Faculty must ensure that resit and deferral coursework is marked
promptly after the date set for receipt.

12.

The deadline stated is final, and resit coursework cannot be submitted late for
a capped pass mark as it is already capped at the module pass mark. Resit
coursework submitted after the deadline, therefore, will be treated as a nonsubmission in accordance with Section 12.4 of this Framework.

13.

Resit and deferral assessments are conducted in accordance with the
procedures set out in Section 3 of this Framework. However, the marks for
resit assessment are not combined with any other marks. In order to pass the
module by resit or deferral, a student must pass all the elements of
assessment required by the Module Assessment Board to make good the
failure.

14.

Deans of Faculty shall ensure that signed and completed mark sheets are
uploaded into the system by the agreed deadline.

15.

Resit and deferral examinations and the submission date for resit and deferral
coursework for undergraduate programmes are set out in the University’s
Assessments Calendar; absence on holiday or work is not a valid extenuating
circumstance in the case of non-submission. Failure to complete successfully
each year's modules may prevent or delay progression to the next year of the
programme of study or result in a student failing to gain an Honours degree.

16.

Students are allowed a maximum of three attempts for any assessment
regardless of their programme of study, subject to normal resit and deferral
regulations, unless they are restarting the entire stage (see 6.4.1, 6.5.3 and
6.6.2). These attempts include a first attempt, a resit attempt and,
exceptionally, a third attempt if the assessment is deferred or a module
retaken.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Retrieval of Failure: page 5 of 10

17.

Resit opportunities for Postgraduate students will take place following the
Semester C Assessment Boards as set out in the University’s Assessment
Calendar for Postgraduate Students.

6.4

Retrieval of Failure - Retake

1.

The University defines a retake as a further attempt, following an initial or,
exceptionally, a second failure, for a maximum mark of the module pass mark,
at the assessment of a module. All assessments for the module must be
retaken. The Progression and Award Board will determine whether the retake
should be with or without attendance. Students who have failed more than
50% of the credits required for successful completion of a stage will also be
considered by a Progression and Award Board for a restart of any stage of an
undergraduate programme.

2.

The Module Assessment Board and Progression and Award Board will deal
with the outcome of retake assessments at the meeting scheduled to consider
the next delivery of the module. A student who fails a module having retaken
the stage can retrieve their failure by resit subject to the normal conditions but
will not normally be allowed to retake a module or restart the stage again.
However, a student may apply to start a different programme and may apply
for specific credits already achieved to be taken into consideration towards the
new programme of study.

3.

Unless the Progression and Award Board specifically states otherwise, the
student must complete all the assessments required in the next delivery of the
module and gain sufficient marks to pass the module. The actual marks
attained by the student in each element of assessment contribute in the
normal way to the overall module mark which is capped at the module pass
mark. The overall module mark will not be capped where a student is retaking
modules as a first attempt.

4.

The Progression and Award Board will only permit a student to retake a
module that the Dean of Faculty has declared will run in the next session.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Retrieval of Failure: page 6 of 10

Otherwise, the Progression and Award Board will require the student to take
another specified module in order to make up the credit shortfall. This will be
with attendance. Nevertheless, the module mark will be capped at the pass
mark and the number of overall attempts will continue to build up unless the
module or modules are being taken as a first attempt.
5.

Students must undertake sufficient learning activities to demonstrate the
outcomes of the module as it is delivered in the next session. This remains the
case if a student is allowed to progress trailing failure with attendance and
timetable constraints prevent them from attending the retake module. If two or
more examinations are held at the same time, the student should attend one
examination and claim extenuating circumstances for the other.

6.

Otherwise, students enrolled upon retake modules with attendance have the
same rights to tuition and support as any other student enrolled upon the
module but will be liable for a pro-rata fee of the full-time tuition fee for the
retake module.

6.5

Retrieval of Failure - Failure on Undergraduate Programmes

1.

In the case of modules failed for the first time where condonement does not
apply or has already been applied to another module, the Progression and
Award Board will allow resit assessment in up to 50% of the credits required
for successful completion of the stage. The nature of the resit assessment will
be determined by the Module Assessment Board and shown upon the
marksheet.

2.

Some programme regulations require students to pass all or particular
elements of assessment within modules in order to accumulate credit towards
that particular programme. If that is the case, the Progression and Award
Board may allow students to attempt resit or deferral assessments in more
than 50% of the credits required for successful completion of the stage, if they
have achieved the overall module pass mark for those modules. In such cases
the Progression and Award Board will determine the maximum number of

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Retrieval of Failure: page 7 of 10

assessments that may be attempted and record that decision in the minutes of
its meetings.
3.

The Progression and Award Board can exclude a student who fails more than
50% of the credits at a specific level of a programme. If so, it may or may not
permit them to apply to restart the entire year subject to the University’s
regulations and the agreement of the Programme Leader. Students restarting
the year must pay the full tuition fee, attend all lectures and seminars and take
all of the assessments again as if for the first time - no marks can be carried
over.

4.

In the case of modules failed after a resit or deferral opportunity, the
Progression and Award Board may allow the student to progress in
accordance with Section 5.2.4 of this Framework (trailing fail). To be eligible
for a resit opportunity, students must meet the progression regulation in
Section 5.2.4. This allows students to carry forward (trail) a failed assessment
in either one 20-credit module or two 10-credit modules, provided they have
attempted the assessment and a mark is recorded, either prior to or following
any resit. Students must have also obtained an average module mark of 50%
across the previous stage.

6.6

Retrieval of Failure - Failure on Taught Postgraduate
Programmes

1.

In the case of modules failed for the first time where condonement does not
apply or has already been applied to another module, the Progression and
Award Board will allow resit assessment in up to 50% of the credits required
for successful completion of the stage. The nature of the resit assessment will
be as determined by the Module Assessment Board and shown upon the
marksheet. Condonement cannot be applied if more than one module has
been failed at a specific stage.

2.

If a student fails modules following a resit opportunity, the Progression and
Award Board may or may not permit them to apply to restart the entire year

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Retrieval of Failure: page 8 of 10

subject to the University’s regulations and the agreement of the Programme
Leader. Students restarting the year must pay the full tuition fee, attend all
lectures and seminars and take all of the assessments again as if for the first
time - no marks can be carried over. If the Progression and Award Board does
not permit them to apply to restart the entire year, it will recommend the award
of a Postgraduate Certificate or Postgraduate Diploma as determined by the
credits that the student has accumulated on the programme.
3.

To be eligible for a resit opportunity, students must meet the progression
regulation in Section 5.2.4. This allows students to carry forward (trail) a failed
assessment in either one 20-credit module or two 10-credit modules, provided
they have attempted the assessment and a mark is recorded, either prior to or
following any resit. Students must have also obtained an average module
mark of 50% across the previous stage.

6.7

Acceptance of Awards
If a student accepts an award which is conferred by a decision of the relevant
Progression and Award Board, by choosing not to exercise their right of
appeal, all further resit or retake opportunities available to the student lapse
with immediate effect.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Retrieval of Failure: page 9 of 10

Document Title

Plymouth Marjon University Student
Regulations Framework – Section 6 Retrieval of
Failure

Document Reference

L:\Student Regulations Framework\Student
Regulations Framework 2025-26

Version

3.15

Issuing Authority

Senate

Custodian

Academic Standards Officer

Document Date

16th October 2009

Last Amended

16th July 2025

Sensitivity

Unclassified

Circulation

Website

Effective from

September 2025

Review Date

Ongoing

Effective until

September 2026

History

Updated annually and subject to routine ongoing
revision. Subject to minor revision on 15/03/23.

Equality Impact Assessment

Preliminary EIA conducted for SRF, December
2010. Updated Equality Analysis Form to be
submitted.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Retrieval of Failure: page 10 of 10

7.

AWARD CLASSIFICATION
This section of the Student Regulations Framework applies to all taught
programmes of Plymouth Marjon University, whether undergraduate or
postgraduate, and to all apprentices enrolled on the University’s
apprenticeship programmes, who are classified as ‘students’ and referred to
accordingly throughout this Procedure.

7.1

General Regulations

1.

Module Assessment Boards will determine module marks and report them to
Progression and Award Boards as described in Section 3 of this Framework.

2.

Unless stated otherwise in the approved programme specification, the
Progression and Award Board will recommend classifications of its degrees
and other academic awards in accordance with these regulations.

3.

Where there is insufficient evidence to determine the class of an award, but
the Progression and Award Board is nevertheless satisfied that the student
would have qualified for the award for which they were a candidate, had it not
been for illness or other sound reason, an unclassified Aegrotat award may be
recommended.

7.2

Honours Degree Classification

1.

All module marks at Levels 5 and 6 for non-top-up degrees will be presented
to the Progression and Award Board as a whole number with any decimal
below x.50 being rounded down and any decimal of x.50 or above being
rounded up. For top-up degrees, all module marks at Level 6 will be presented
in the same way.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 award classification: page 1 of 9

2.

If, exceptionally, a student has acquired more than the credits required at each
of these levels, the Progression and Award Board will first take account of the
marks in all compulsory modules for the award and title for which the student
is registered, then the student’s best performance in optional modules
associated with that award and title, up to the total credit requirement. The
Board will disregard all other marks.

3.

The Progression and Award Board will recommend the classification
calculated from all credits obtained at the applicable levels in accordance with
the following classifications:
70+

First Class

60-69 Upper Second Class
50-59 Lower Second Class
40-49 Third Class
The overall weighted average will be presented at the Progression and Award
Board as a whole number with any decimal below 0.5 being rounded down
and any decimal of 0.5 or above being rounded up. The classification will then
be determined by the following formula:
•

The best marks achieved in 80 credits pursued at Level 6 will be given
a weighting of 3 (i.e. they will count three times).

•

The marks achieved in the remaining credits pursued at Level 6 and the
best marks achieved in 40 credits pursued at Level 5 will be given a
weighting of 2 (i.e. they will count twice).

•

The marks achieved in the remaining credits pursued at Level 5 will be
given a weighting of 1 (i.e. they will count once).

In exceptional circumstances, where a programme includes more than 120
credits pursued at Level 6, a proportional calculation will be applied.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 award classification: page 2 of 9

4.

If a student is admitted to Level 6 (whether to a top-up degree or, with credit,
to a non-top-up degree), the classification will be determined by the following
formula with regard to credits pursued at Level 6 only:
•

The best marks achieved in 40 credits pursued at Level 6 will be given
a weighting of 3 (i.e. they will count three times).

•

The marks achieved in the next best 40 credits pursued at Level 6 will
be given a weighting of 2 (i.e. they will count twice).

•

The marks achieved in the remaining credits will be given a weighting of
1 (i.e. they will count once).

In exceptional circumstances, where a programme includes more than 120
credits pursued at Level 6, a proportional calculation will be applied.
5.

If a student was admitted with credit other than as described in Sections 7.2.4
above, mean values will be calculated on the remaining credits pro rata and
the Progression and Award Board will recommend the highest classification
available, following as closely as possible the formula described in Section
7.2.3 above.

6.

Modules that are not assigned a numeric mark, e.g. pass/fail modules, or are
rated at Levels other than 5 or 6, do not count towards degree classification.
Mean values will be calculated on the remaining credits pro rata and the
Progression and Award Board will recommend a classification, following as
closely as possible the formulae described in Section 7.2.3 above.

7.

Where the overall weighted average falls within 1% of a higher classification,
the higher classification will be applied.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 award classification: page 3 of 9

7.3

Foundation Degree Classification

1.

The credit-weighted mean of all module marks at Level 5, and the three best
module marks at Level 4, will be presented to the Progression and Award
Board as a whole number with any decimal below x.50 being rounded down
and any decimal of x.50 or above being rounded up.

2.

If exceptionally a student has acquired more than the credits required at Level
5, the Progression and Award Board will first take account of the marks in all
compulsory modules for the award and title for which the student is registered,
then the student’s best performance in optional modules associated with that
award and title, up to the total credit requirement. The Board will disregard all
other marks.

3.

The Progression and Award Board will recommend the classification
calculated from the equally weighted mean of all Level 5 credits, and the three
best module marks at Level 4, as follows:
70+ Foundation Degree with Distinction
60-69 Foundation Degree with Merit

5.

Modules that are not assigned a numeric mark, e.g. pass/fail modules, do not
count towards degree classification. Mean values will be calculated on the
remaining credits pro rata and the Progression and Award Board will
recommend a classification, following as closely as possible the formulae
described in Section 7.4.4 above.

6.

Where the overall weighted average falls within 1% of a higher classification,
the higher classification will be applied.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 award classification: page 4 of 9

7.4

Master’s Degree Classification

1.

The credit-weighted mean of all module marks will be presented to the
Progression and Award Board as a whole number with any decimal below
x.50 being rounded down and any decimal of x.50 or above being rounded up.

2.

If, exceptionally, a student has acquired more than the credits required for the
award, the Progression and Award Board will first take account of the marks in
all compulsory modules for the award and title for which the student is
registered, then the student’s best performance in optional modules
associated with that award and title, up to the total credit requirement. The
Board will disregard all other marks.

3.

The Progression and Award Board will condone modules in accordance with
Section 6 of this Framework, up to the maximum of value stated therein.

4.

The Progression and Award Board will recommend the classification
calculated from the equally weighted mean of all credits as follows:
70+

Master’s Degree with Distinction

60-69 Master’s Degree with Merit
50-59 Master’s Degree Pass
5.

If a student was admitted with credit, mean values will be calculated on the
remaining credits pro rata and the Progression and Award Board will
recommend the highest classification available, following the formula
described in Section 7.4.4 above.

6.

Modules that are not assigned a numeric mark, e.g. pass/fail modules, or are
rated at levels other than Level 7, do not count towards degree classification.
Mean values will be calculated on the remaining credits pro rata and the
Progression and Award Board will recommend a classification, following as
closely as possible the formula described in Section 7.4.4 above.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 award classification: page 5 of 9

7.

Where the overall weighted average falls within 1% of a higher classification,
the higher classification will be applied.

7.5

Integrated Master’s Degree Classification

1.

The classification system applicable to Integrated Master’s Degree awards will
be determined by the student’s point of exit. If a student exits with a Level 6
award (i.e. a Bachelor's Degree or Bachelor's Degree with Honours), then the
undergraduate algorithm will apply as set out in Section 7.2 of this Framework.
If, however, a student exits with a Level 7 award (i.e. an Integrated Master’s
Degree) then the following algorithm will normally apply:
•

The best marks achieved in 100 credits pursued at Level 7 will be given
a weighting of 1 (i.e. they will count once).

•

The best marks achieved in 100 credits pursued at Level 6 or above
(not counting credit from the above) will also be given a weighting of 1
(i.e. they will also count once).

•

The best marks achieved in 40 credits pursued at Level 5 or above (not
counting credit from the above) will also be given a weighting of 1 (i.e. they
will also count once).

2.

If a student first registered before 1st September 2019 and has not interrupted
their studies, the Progression and Award Board may also consider the
regulations in force on the date of the student’s first registration and
recommend the higher of the two possible classifications. Specifically, the
alternative classification will be determined by the credit-weighted mean of all
module marks at Level 7 only. A student who interrupts their studies will be
subject to the classification regulations in force at the time of the resumption of
studies.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 award classification: page 6 of 9

7.6

Apprenticeship Award Classification

1.

The University validates two levels of apprenticeship programmes: Higher
apprenticeships (Level 5), and Degree apprenticeships (Level 6 and above).
Apprenticeships must include an academic programme leading to a University
award at Levels 5 to 7.

2.

Apprenticeship courses finish with an End Point Assessment (EPA), the format
of which will depend on the apprenticeship standard and will be outlined in the
EPA plan on the Institute for Apprenticeships and Technical Education (IfATE)
website and the Programme Specification document. The EPA will confirm the
apprentice is occupationally competent in their role before they receive their
apprenticeship certificate, and will determine whether the overall
apprenticeship standard has been met.

3.

For integrated apprenticeship courses, where the University is responsible for
the teaching of the award and the EPA module is included within the structure
of the course (for example a 20-credit final year module), the Progression and
Award Board (PAB) will confirm all modules and completion of the EPA (and
notify this to the Education and Skills Funding Agency). Where the EPA
module is ungraded, as specified in the EPA plan, this will be excluded from
the calculation of the degree award classification.

4.

For integrated apprenticeship courses, the PAB may exceptionally require an
additional external examiner who meets the criteria set out in the EPA
Assessment Plan for the course being examined. The PAB and End Point
Assessment Panel will make a decision on the award of the degree and its
classification and also secondly whether the learner has passed or failed the
EPA. The two separate decisions will be based on differing criteria.

5.

For non-integrated apprenticeship courses, the employer will select an
approved end point assessment organisation to conduct the EPA. The
apprentice cannot be awarded until there has been confirmation that they
have passed their End point Assessment.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 award classification: page 7 of 9

6.

For some regulated professions, the apprenticeship standard follows a fully
integrated EPA. Students will be informed by their Academic Department if this
is the case. The EPA is not included within the structure of the course. The
learner can only progress to the PAB once the Gateway requirements, in line
with the apprenticeship standard, have been met. The PAB will then confirm
the credit, EPA and make a recommendation for the conferment of the award.

7.7

Classification of Other Awards of the University

1.

The Progression and Award Board will classify other academic awards of the
University, including Certificates of Higher Education, defined in the
Regulations for Academic Awards as follows.

2.

The credit-weighted mean of all module marks will be presented to the
Progression and Award Board as a whole number with any decimal below
x.50 being rounded down and any decimal of x.50 or above being rounded up.

3.

If, exceptionally, a student has acquired more than the credits required for the
award, the Progression and Award Board will first take account of the marks in
all compulsory modules for the award and title for which the student is
registered, then the student’s best performance in optional modules
associated with that award and title, up to the total credit requirement. The
Board will disregard all other marks.

4.

The Progression and Award Board will recommend the classification
calculated from the equally weighted mean of all credits as follows:
70+

with Distinction

60-69 with Merit

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 award classification: page 8 of 9

Document Title

Plymouth Marjon University Student
Regulations Framework Section 7 Award
Classification

Document Reference

L:\Student Regulations Framework\Student
Regulations Framework 2025-26

Version

3.15

Issuing Authority

Senate

Custodian

Academic Standards Officer

Document Date

16th October 2009

Last Amended

16th July 2025

Sensitivity

Unclassified

Circulation

Website

Effective from

September 2025

Review Date

Ongoing

Effective until

September 2026

History

Updated annually and subject to routine ongoing
revision.

Equality Impact Assessment

Preliminary EIA conducted for SRF, December
2010. Updated Equality Analysis Form to be
submitted.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 award classification: page 9 of 9

8.

REGULATIONS FOR ACADEMIC AWARDS
This section of the Student Regulations Framework applies to all taught
programmes of Plymouth Marjon University, whether undergraduate or
postgraduate and to all apprentices enrolled on the University’s apprenticeship
programmes, who are also classified as ‘students’ and referred to accordingly
throughout this Procedure.

8.1

Authority to Confer Awards

1.

Senate is responsible for conferment of academic awards on behalf of
Plymouth Marjon University. Except for honorary degrees, an academic award
is conferred only when Senate has confirmed the recommendation of the
appropriate Progression and Award Board for the granting of that award. This
is achieved when the Academic Registrar, who is Secretary to Senate, signs
the Progression and Award Board’s recommendation for the award.

2.

In the event that clarification of these Regulations is required to secure the
conferment of an award within a specified time, the Vice-Chancellor, who is
Chair of Senate, may interpret the Regulations on its behalf. Any such
interpretation shall be reported to the next meeting of Senate.

3.

The University will maintain a permanent record of all the academic awards it
confers.

4.

These regulations apply to all academic awards of the University wherever or
however the teaching, learning and assessment takes place.

5.

Credit is not in itself an academic award of the University and is not the
subject of these regulations. Section 3 of this Framework includes the
authority for the assignment of credit by Module Assessment Boards.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Regulations for Academic Awards: page 1 of 19

6.

These regulations align with the Frameworks for Higher Education
Qualifications of UK Degree-Awarding Bodies, February 2024, and the Higher
Education Credit Framework for England: Advice on Academic Credit
Arrangements, May 2021.

7.

Throughout these regulations, reference to a post holder shall include the post
holder in person or any other person which the University authorises to act in
that capacity.

8.2

Named Awards
Each student of the University works towards a named award, normally of the
University but which may be registered for an award of another awarding
body. The award is bound by the University’s regulations and the relevant
Programme Specification.

8.3

List of Awards
Level 4 awards

1.

2.

The University may confer the following Level 4 awards:
•

University Certificate

•

Certificate in Professional Studies

•

Certificate of Higher Education (Cert HE)

The award of Certificate in Professional Studies is linked only to programmes
of study in the context of specific professional experience and designed to
establish or build upon professional qualifications or registration.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Regulations for Academic Awards: page 2 of 19

Level 5 Awards
3.

4.

The University may confer the following Level 5 awards:
•

University Diploma

•

Diploma in Professional Studies

•

Diploma of Higher Education (DipHE)

•

Foundation Degree

The award of Diploma in Professional Studies is linked only to programmes of
study in the context of specific professional experience and designed to
establish or build upon professional qualifications or registration.

5.

6.

The Foundation Degree may be awarded as:
•

Foundation Degree Arts (FdA)

•

Foundation Degree Science (FdSc)

The award of Foundation Degree Science (FdSc) is linked only to programmes
in which studies are substantially based on science or mathematics and their
applications.
Level 6 Awards

7.

The University may confer the following Level 6 awards:
•

Bachelor's Degree

•

Bachelor's Degree with Honours

•

Graduate Certificate

•

Graduate Diploma

•

Professional Graduate Certificate in Education (PGCE)

•

Professional Graduate Certificate in Education (PGCE) (International)

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Regulations for Academic Awards: page 3 of 19

8.

The Bachelor’s Degree and the Bachelor's Degree with Honours may be
awarded as:

9.

•

Bachelor of Arts (BA)

•

Bachelor of Education (BEd)

•

Bachelor of Education (International) (BEd International)

•

Bachelor of Science (BSc)

The award of Bachelor of Science (BSc) is linked only to programmes in which
studies are substantially based on science or mathematics and their
applications.

10.

The award of Bachelor of Education (BEd) is linked only to programmes of
initial teacher training including a substantial element of teaching practice.
Moreover, it is awarded only to students who have satisfied the Government’s
current requirements for the award of Qualified Teacher Status (QTS). This
requirement must be recorded in the Programme Specification.

11.

The award of Bachelor of Education (International) (BEd International) is
linked only to programmes of initial teacher training including a substantial
element of teaching practice and where the award is taught wholly or in part
overseas. This award does not carry UK Qualified Teacher Status (QTS) and
does not entitle the holder to teach in maintained schools or non-maintained
special schools in the UK.

12.

The award of Professional Graduate Certificate in Education is linked only to
programmes of initial teacher training including a substantial element of
teaching practice. The award of Professional Graduate Certificate in Education
(PGCE) (International) is linked only to programmes of initial teacher training
including a substantial element of teaching practice and where the award is
taught wholly or in part overseas. This award does not carry UK Qualified
Teacher Status (QTS) and does not entitle the holder to teach in maintained
schools or non-maintained special schools in the UK.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Regulations for Academic Awards: page 4 of 19

Level 7 Awards
13.

14.

The University may confer the following level 7 awards:
•

Postgraduate Certificate in Education (PGCE)

•

Postgraduate Certificate in Education (International) (PGCE International)

•

Postgraduate Certificate (PGCert)

•

Postgraduate Diploma (PGDip)

•

Master’s Degree

•

Master’s Degree (Integrated)

The award of Postgraduate Certificate in Education is linked only to
programmes of initial teacher training including a substantial element of
teaching practice. The award of Postgraduate Certificate in Education
(International) (PGCE International) is linked only to programmes of initial
teacher training including a substantial element of teaching practice and where
the award is taught wholly or in part overseas. This award does not carry UK
Qualified Teacher Status (QTS) and does not entitle the holder to teach in
maintained schools or non-maintained special schools in the UK.

15.

The Master’s Degree (inclusive of Integrated) may be awarded as:
•

Master of Arts (MA)

•

Master of Education (MEd)

•

Master of Science (MSc)

•

Master of Business Administration (MBA)

•

Master of Osteopathy (MOst)

•

Master of Physiotherapy (MPhysio)

•

Master of Psychotherapy and Counselling (MPsy)

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Regulations for Academic Awards: page 5 of 19

16.

•

Master of Public Administration (MPA)

•

Master of Public Health (MPH)

•

Master of Research (MRes)

The award of Master of Education (MEd) is linked only to programmes of
continuing educational professional development.

17.

The award of Master of Science (MSc) is linked only to programmes in which
studies are substantially based on science or mathematics and their
applications.

18.

The award of Master of Business Administration (MBA) shall be used for
programmes that focus on the general principles and functions of
management and the development of management skills. Students entering
MBA programmes must have appropriate experience of managerial practice
and should normally have at least two years of appropriate postgraduate work
experience on admission.

19.

The title Master of Public Administration (MPA) shall be used for programmes
that focus on the general principles and functions of management and/or
policy and administration in the public sector. Students entering MPA
programmes must have appropriate experience of managerial practice and/or
policy in the public sector and should normally have at least two years of
appropriate postgraduate work experience on admission.

20.

The title Master of Public Health (MPH) shall be used for programmes which
take an interdisciplinary approach to areas related to public health. Students
will be taught how to monitor, diagnose, and regulate the health concerns of
communities through public policies.

21.

The Master of Research (MRes) is a taught postgraduate degree. The award
of MRes shall be used to provide a structured research training programme
which can act as a foundation for doctoral study or for a research career
outside academia.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Regulations for Academic Awards: page 6 of 19

22.

The award of MOst (Integrated Master’s Degree) is a 4-year full time or 6-year
part time pre-registration undergraduate and postgraduate degree, which is
designed to develop a critical evaluation of the theory and practice of
osteopathy. Recognised Qualification (RQ) status will be sought from the
General Osteopathic Council (GOsC).

23.

The award of MPhysio (Master of Physiotherapy) is linked only to programmes
which prepare students to meet the standards of proficiency for
physiotherapists set by the Health and Care Professions Council (HCPC).
Honorary Awards

24.

The University may confer any of its degree awards as an honorary degree. In
addition, the following degrees may be conferred honoris causa in accordance
with University Guidelines for the Award of Honorary Degrees:
•

Master of Letters (MLitt)

•

Master of Music (MMus)

8.4

Standards of Awards

1.

The University defines the standards of its awards in terms of the amount and
the level of study undertaken, which builds upon the knowledge and skills
expected of each student on commencement of their programme.

2.

Except for the conferment of honorary awards, on completion of their studies,
students are required to demonstrate outcomes in line with the qualification
descriptors and the amount and level of study indicated in the Frameworks for
Higher Education Qualifications of UK Degree-Awarding Bodies, February
2024, and the Higher Education Credit Framework for England: Advice on
Academic Credit Arrangements, May 2021.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Regulations for Academic Awards: page 7 of 19

3.

The University’s Senate ensures that programmes of study are designed so
that students can demonstrate outcomes at the level appropriate for the
awards to which they lead.

8.5

Entrance Requirements for Academic Awards

1.

The General Entrance Requirement for a taught programme of study in the
University is that an applicant has provided evidence of knowledge and skills
to support the academic judgement that the applicant will succeed in their
studies. The evidence required is likely to include the qualifications described
herein or their equivalent.

2.

The Programme Specification relating to a programme of study leading to an
award of the University must state any additional entrance requirements for a
specific programme.

3.

Entry tariffs for each programme will be published on the University website.

4.

The University will publish guidance for staff, students and applicants in its
Admissions Policy and Procedures.

8.6

Admission with Credit and Transfer between Programmes

1.

In accordance with the University’s Admissions Policy and Procedures,
evidence of prior certificated learning and/or prior experiential learning
appropriate to the named award will allow a student to apply for admission to a
programme of study with specific credit. The decision to allow admission with
credit will exempt the student from specified whole modules, the outcomes of
which the student has already demonstrated. Students admitted by direct
entry to any stage of a programme other than the beginning of its first stage
are regarded as being admitted with credit, as endorsed by the University’s
Admissions team. Prior certificated learning can only be counted once. Once
used for admission to an award of the University or of an alternative provider

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Regulations for Academic Awards: page 8 of 19

the same credit cannot be used for an additional award. Double counting of
credit is not permissible.
2.

The University will make an academic judgement as to whether the learning is
appropriate to the named award and which particular modules may be
exempted. In doing so, the University will be bound by the General Entrance
Requirement described in Section 8.5.1 of this Framework, by the limits
imposed in this regulation and by the aims and outcomes of the programme as
they are defined in the Programme Specification. The Admissions team will
state any exempted modules in the formal offer letter to the applicant and
inform the Registry and Programme Support Office so the Student Record can
be maintained. Documents and evidence relating to admission with credit will
be retained in the student’s file throughout their registration.

3.

The total of specific certificated credit allowed to exempt the student from
specified whole modules (as per Section 8.6.1 of this Framework) may not
exceed the following limits:
Level 4
•

University Certificate and Certificate of Professional Studies – zero.

•

Certificate of Higher Education (Cert HE) – 60 credits.

Level 5
•

University Diploma and Diploma of Professional Studies – zero.

•

Diploma of Higher Education (DipHE) – 120 credits of which not more than
60 are at level 5.

•

Graduate Certificate – zero.

•

Graduate Diploma – 60 credits.

•

Foundation Degree – 180 credits of which not more than 60 are at level 5.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Regulations for Academic Awards: page 9 of 19

Level 6
•

Bachelor's Degree – 240 credits of which none may be higher than Level 5.

•

Bachelor's Degree with Honours – 240 credits, of which no more than 60
may be at Level 6. Exceptionally, candidates with a certificated level 6
professional qualification may be admitted with a maximum of 300 credits,
of which no more than 60 are at level 6.

•

Professional Graduate Certificate in Education (PGCE) – zero.
NB - in the case of top-up degrees, a similar requirement exists but this
does not constitute ‘advanced entry’ per se. This is because Levels 4 and
5 are not offered on these specific programmes.

Level 7

4.

•

Postgraduate Certificate (PGCert) – 30 credits.

•

Postgraduate Certificate in Education (PGCE) – zero.

•

Postgraduate Diploma (PGDip) – 60 credits.

•

Master’s Degree – 90 credits.

Notwithstanding the overall limits on RPL within this Framework, not more
than 50% of the total credit requirement for an academic award of the
University will be awarded on the basis of prior experiential learning alone.
Where a proposal is made to increase this amount for all entrants to a
programme, agreement from the University’s Senate will be required. This
must be sought at the point of programme approval and will not be applied
retrospectively. This exemption will not be granted to individual applicants
seeking entry to a programme. This maximum limit of 50% does not apply to
applicants to pre-registration nursing programmes (including nursing
apprenticeships) who are currently a NMC registered nurse without restrictions
on their practice.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Regulations for Academic Awards: page 10 of 19

5.

The approved Programme Specification for a named award may,
exceptionally, specify higher or lower limits for admission with credit, for
example at the request of an accrediting Professional, Statutory or Regulatory
Body (PSRB), or may include in its Specific Entrance Requirements particular
qualifications for which admission with credit will be permitted.

6.

Applications for the transfer of credit between University programmes will be
considered on the basis of the equivalence of the curriculum studied. The
general principles in Section 8.6.2 of this Framework will apply, but subject to
the student achieving the aims and outcomes of the programme, there will be
no limit on the number or level of credits that may be transferred. The
Programme Leader or Programme Area Leader will communicate their request
with Registry who can authorise the update to the Student Record. Documents
and evidence relating to the transfer of credit will be retained electronically by
Registry throughout the student’s registration.

7.

Transfers of credit will normally be possible only at the defined stages of a
programme or at a point when modules start or end.

8.

The University will publish guidance for staff, students and applicants in its
Admissions Policy and Procedures.

8.7

Credit Requirements for Academic Awards

1.

This regulation defines the minimum credit requirements for the
recommendation of an award of the University to a student admitted in
accordance with Section 8.5 of this Framework. However, the accumulation of
credit at appropriate levels is a necessary but insufficient requirement for the
conferment of University awards.

2.

The Programme Specification will state the modules that must or may be
studied. It will also state any additional outcomes that are not assessed for the
award of credit, but which a student must demonstrate before they can be
considered for progression to the next stage and/or the award.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Regulations for Academic Awards: page 11 of 19

3.

The Higher Education Credit Framework for England: Advice on Academic
Credit Arrangements, May 2021 describes the use of credit in UK higher
education institutions and the definitions in these regulations have been set in
line with that Framework.

4.

The minimum credit requirements for awards of the University are as follows:
Level 4 Awards
•

University Certificate – 60 credits at Level 4 or higher.

•

Certificate of Professional Studies – 60 credits at Level 4 or higher.

•

Certificate of Higher Education (CertHE) – 120 credits at Level 4 or higher.

Level 5 Awards
•

University Diploma – 60 credits at Level 5 or higher.

•

Diploma of Professional Studies – 60 credits at Level 5 or higher.

•

Diploma of Higher Education (DipHE) – 240 credits at Levels 4 and 5 or
higher, of which not more than 120 are at Level 4.

•

Foundation Degree – 240 credits at Levels 4 and 5 or higher, of which not
more than 120 are at Level 4.

Level 6 Awards
•

Professional Graduate Certificate in Education (PGCE) – 60 credits at
Level 6 or higher.

•

Graduate Certificate – 60 credits at Level 6 or higher.

•

Graduate Diploma, Bachelor’s Degree with Honours (top-up) – 120 credits
at Level 6 or higher.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Regulations for Academic Awards: page 12 of 19

•

Bachelor's Degree – 300 credits at Levels 4 and 5 and 6 or higher, of
which not more than 120 are at Level 4 and at least 60 are at Level 6 or
higher.

•

Bachelor's Degree with Honours – 360 credits at Levels 4 and 5 and 6 or
higher, of which not more than 120 are at Level 4 and at least 120 are at
Level 6 or higher.

Level 7 Awards
•

Postgraduate Certificate in Education (PGCE) – 60 credits at Level 7.

•

Postgraduate Certificate (PGCert) – 60 credits at Level 7.

•

Postgraduate Diploma (PGDip) – 120 credits at Level 7.

•

Master’s Degree (Integrated) – 480 credits at Levels 4 or 5 or 6 or 7,
including 120 credits at Level 7.

•

Master’s Degree – 180 credits at Level 7.

8.8

Maximum Period of Registration

1.

The default maximum period for registration for programmes of more than one
year’s duration is three years longer than the planned duration of the
programme of study. However, for programmes of one year’s duration, the
maximum registration is three years for full-time students and five years for
part-time students. Absolute maximum registration periods are as follows:•

Foundation Degree – 8 years

•

Bachelor’s Degree (including with Honours) – 10 years

•

Master’s Degree – 5 years

•

Master’s Degree (Integrated) – 11 years

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Regulations for Academic Awards: page 13 of 19

2.

A student’s registration for an award of the University will cease if two
academic years elapse without the award of credit towards that award and the
Progression and Award Board will recommend any interim award for which the
student may be qualified. For this purpose, an academic year will include any
resit period and may be extended to allow for differences in the timing of
Module Assessment Boards and Progression and Award Boards between
years. Subject to Section 1 of this Framework, such a student may apply for
admission with credit to that programme or another programme of the
University.

3.

A student who voluntarily exits the programme with an Ordinary Degree,
without attempting the Honours project, may normally be permitted to return
and complete the Honours project within a five-year period. This is subject to
the approval of the Programme/Programme Area Leader and the Academic
Registrar. However, this provision does not apply to students who exit with an
Ordinary Degree due to non-completion resulting from failed modules. Any
Honours ‘top-up’ must be completed within the standard maximum period of
registration, as outlined above.

8.9

Classification of Awards

1.

The University will confer the Bachelor’s Degree with Honours with one of the
following classifications of honours:

2.

•

First Class

•

Upper Second Class

•

Lower Second Class

•

Third Class

The University may confer all other Certificates, Diplomas and Degrees,
except those conferred in Honoris Causa or Aegrotat, with the addition of
one of the following classifications where applicable:

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Regulations for Academic Awards: page 14 of 19

3.

•

with Merit

•

with Distinction

The Progression and Award Board will use the method of classifying awards
described in Section 7 of this Framework at the time it meets.

8.10 Conferment and Certification of Awards
1.

A recommendation for conferment of an award of the University shall be
confirmed when all the following conditions have been satisfied.
•

The student was a registered student on a programme of the University at
the time of their assessment for an award.

•

The student has discharged all academic debt to the University (i.e. tuition
fees).

•

Registry and Programme Support Office has confirmed that the student
completed the programme leading to the award recommended.

•

The award has been recommended by the appropriate Progression and
Award Board.

•

The recommendation for the award has been approved by the Chair of the
Progression and Award Board confirming that all assessments have been
carried out in accordance with the requirements of Senate.

2.

The University will issue a certificate for each award it confers, on which will
be recorded:
•

the name of the University

•

the name of the student as it appears on the list of recommendations
submitted by the Progression and Award Board

•

the award and any classification

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Regulations for Academic Awards: page 15 of 19

•

the title of the programme as approved by Senate

•

where appropriate, an endorsement that the programme was studied in
association with an approved partner institution

•

any other approved endorsement

•

the date of the Progression and Award Board’s recommendation for the
award

•
3.

the signatures of the Chair and Secretary of Senate.

The University will issue to each student on completion of their studies a
European Diploma Supplement which may include additional information.

8.11 Titles of Named Awards
The title will reflect accurately the field of study and should not mislead
students or potential employers. An award may be untitled if the award itself
sufficiently describes the content of the programme.

8.12 General Regulations relating to Awards of the University
Interim Awards
1.

When a student withdraws from their programme of study, or a Progression
and Award Board excludes them on academic grounds or determines that
their maximum period of registration has expired, it will recommend the
conferment of any interim award for which the student is qualified.

2.

If the student subsequently uses that interim award within two years to gain
admission with credit to the same programme or another programme leading
to an equivalent award, then they must surrender that interim award.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Regulations for Academic Awards: page 16 of 19

3.

The Postgraduate Certificate in Education is not an interim award and is not to
be surrendered if it is used to gain admission with credit to a taught
postgraduate programme of study.

4.

A Foundation Degree is not an interim award and is not to be surrendered if it
is used to gain admission with credit to an Honours Degree programme.
Aegrotat and Posthumous Awards

5.

Where there is insufficient evidence to determine the class of an award, but
the Progression and Award Board is nevertheless satisfied that the student
would have qualified for the award for which they were a candidate, had it not
been for illness or other good cause, an unclassified Aegrotat award may be
recommended.

6.

Senate will not confer the Aegrotat award until the student, or a person
authorised to act on behalf of the student, has signified acceptance of the
Aegrotat award, or the maximum period of registration as defined in these
regulations has elapsed.

7.

An award may be conferred posthumously to a student who was a registered
student at the time of death and satisfied the remaining general conditions for
the conferment of the award as far as was practicable. If there is insufficient
evidence to classify the award, the PAB will recommend an Aegrotat award be
conferred posthumously.
Deprivation and withholding of award

8.

In exceptional circumstances, on the recommendation of the relevant
Progression and Award Board or a Student Misconduct Panel, Senate may
deprive any person of any award conferred by the University. Such a
recommendation may be made, for example, if the person was found to have
been admitted to the University or recommended for the award on the basis of
material misrepresentation or non-disclosure of facts, or following academic
misconduct. In the case of an honorary graduate whose conduct in public life

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Regulations for Academic Awards: page 17 of 19

might harm the reputation of the University, the Vice-Chancellor may present a
case to Senate for the annulment of the award.
9.

The University will not permit a student who has undischarged liabilities to the
University to attend any graduation ceremony. In addition, certification will be
withheld if there are unpaid tuition fees.
Academic Dress

10.

Graduands who attend a University graduation ceremony for the formal
presentation of their academic award must wear Academic Dress, as defined
by the University.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Regulations for Academic Awards: page 18 of 19

Document Title

Plymouth Marjon University Student
Regulations Framework – Section 8
Regulations for Academic Awards

Document Reference

L:\Student Regulations Framework\Student
Regulations Framework 2025-26

Version

3.14

Issuing Authority

Senate

Custodian

Academic Standards Officer

Document Date

16th October 2009

Last Amended

19th May 2025

Sensitivity

Unclassified

Circulation

Website

Effective from

September 2025

Review Date

Ongoing

Effective until

September 2026

History

Updated annually and subject to routine ongoing
revision, most recently on 04/11/22.

Equality Impact Assessment

Preliminary EIA conducted for SRF, December
2010. Updated Equality Analysis Form to be
submitted.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Regulations for Academic Awards: page 19 of 19

9.

SUPPORT TO CONTINUE IN STUDY
PROCEDURE
This section of the Student Regulations Framework applies to all taught
programmes of Plymouth Marjon University, whether undergraduate or
postgraduate, to all research degree students and to all apprentices enrolled
on the University’s apprenticeship programmes, who are classified as
‘students’ and referred to accordingly throughout this Procedure.

9.1

Introduction

1.

This procedure will be used where the University is concerned about a
student’s mental or emotional well-being, health or behaviour, to the extent
that this might have an adverse effect on the student, other students or staff. It
will only be used when the University is unsure that a student is ‘capable of
living independently (with adequate support) whilst also being able to continue
in study and not have such a negative impact on others in the study
environment as to significantly impair the learning experience of others’.

2.

Staff may raise a specific welfare concern, via the appropriate form, with the
Student Wellbeing and Support Welfare Concern Group. The Student Welfare
Concern process is primarily one of support, to reduce risk and prevent the
deterioration of health, wellbeing and behaviour, including ‘radicalisation’ (i.e.,
being drawn into terrorism or extremist behaviour). Staff should consult the
University’s Mental and Emotional Well-being Guidelines for more detailed
advice on what signs to look for and what to do if a student is exhibiting
concerning or disturbing behaviour.

3.

Staff who are concerned about a student’s health, wellbeing or behaviour
should use this procedure. If there is a concern of this nature, it is appropriate
to explore the student’s health, wellbeing issues or pattern of behaviour as
promptly as possible and agree supportive action.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Support to Continue in Study Procedure: page 1 of 10

4.

A student ‘giving cause for concern’ is likely to be one who is behaving out of
character. The University embraces and accepts difference, and its students
and staff will exhibit a diverse range of backgrounds, abilities and disabilities.
A student might behave in ways that a casual observer may consider unusual,
but which is characteristic for that student. Therefore, signs to look for and
which might give rise to the need to invoke the Support to Continue in Study
procedures include, but are not limited to:
•

A number of third-party reports about a student. These may be an
indication that there is a need to address:
•

under-performance in academic work; frequent lateness/absence from
lectures; missing deadlines; poor concentration or a lack of
engagement to respond in a timely manner to reasonable requests
made by the University; lack of self-care; self-harm; suicidal thoughts;
substance misuse;

•

unusually loud or aggressive behaviour or withdrawn or unusually quiet
behaviour;

•

concern about how a student’s behaviour is affecting their own and/or
others’ wellbeing in accommodation on campus or in private rental.

•

concern about how well a student may manage their learning
experience on off-site activities (e.g. residential trips) within a module or
programme, or year abroad study. Students may have been receiving
support, but staff may be concerned as to how well a student may cope
in an unusual environment even when support issues have been
addressed.

5.

The Head of Student Wellbeing and Support (or nominee) will keep relevant
departments of the University fully informed of the outcome of any formal
assessment of Support to Continue to Study, whilst respecting confidentiality,
data protection and professional guidelines.

6.

This procedure has two stages based on the perceived level of risk to the
health and safety, welfare or ability of the student to continue in study or the
risk to others posed by their health, wellbeing or behaviour. The procedure
can be activated at either stage.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Support to Continue in Study Procedure: page 2 of 10

7.

If staff are unsure about implementing this procedure, they should seek advice
and discuss their concerns, anonymously and in general terms, with a member
of the Student Wellbeing and Support Welfare Concern Group directly or via
the Head of Student Wellbeing and Support (or nominee). The Group meets
on a regular basis to discuss student issues and concerns that have arisen
within, or as referrals to, Student Wellbeing and Support.

8.

If a student on a professional programme is giving cause for concern,
particularly with regard to placements, the Fitness to Practise procedures
might also need to be invoked. The Support to Continue in Study procedures
will apply to all aspects of study that do not involve placement opportunities or
similar contacts with external agencies. If a student is subsequently
suspended from their programme of study, this will also include any
placements and the Fitness to Practise procedures will be suspended
accordingly.

9.2

Stage One Procedure

1.

If concerns arise about a student’s health, wellbeing or behaviour, a member
of staff with primary responsibility for their academic progress and/or wellbeing, such as a Personal Development Tutor, should, in the first instance,
approach them in a sympathetic and understanding way. Other staff should
report their concerns to the Student Wellbeing and Support Welfare Concern
Group via SWS@marjon.ac.uk in order to make the approach. This might also
result in a referral to an external organisation (e.g. Channel, The Zone), with
the student’s consent.

2.

The concerns should be explained to the student as clearly as possible and
reported to the Student Wellbeing and Support Welfare Concern Group,
normally with the student’s knowledge, using the Student Welfare Concern
Form. The student concern will be brought to the next meeting of the Student
Wellbeing and Support Welfare Concern Group or, if appropriate, a special
meeting will be convened.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Support to Continue in Study Procedure: page 3 of 10

3.

The Group will consider the referral and nature of the concerns before
deciding whether:
•

no further action should be taken; or

•

a member of the Student Wellbeing and Support Welfare Concern Group
should be appointed to liaise with the student and all staff concerned (by
way of an informal meeting and/or other appropriate mechanisms) to offer
and co-ordinate support and referrals, as appropriate: or

•

a case conference should be convened, on the grounds that there is
evidence of a safeguarding concern, persistent anti-social behaviour,
withdrawal or extreme physical change / uncharacteristic episodes that
have not been or are unlikely to be resolved without such a meeting.

4.

If a case conference is convened, the Head of Student Wellbeing and Support
(or nominee) will write to the student, setting out the arrangements, and all
relevant parties including the Academic Standards Officer should be sent a
copy of the letter.

5.

The Head of Student Wellbeing and Support (or nominee) will chair the
meeting. A nominee of the appropriate Dean of Faculty (such as the Academic
Director, Programme Leader, or Programme Area Leader) will also attend,
along with a Student Life Officer and/or the Resident Life Tutor in cases where
the student is a campus resident or where the behaviour occurred in a
University residence.

6.

The student may choose to be accompanied by a friend, who should normally
be a student of the University or a representative of the Student Union.
Students with a disability also have the right to be accompanied by a support
worker (e.g. sign language interpreter or mental health worker) as appropriate
to their needs.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Support to Continue in Study Procedure: page 4 of 10

7.

The meeting will invite the student to respond to the concerns. A clear, written
statement from the member of staff calling the meeting should be sent to the
student and staff attending at least 48 hours before the meeting. The meeting
will focus on how the concerns can be addressed, along with the potential
consequences of (a) not keeping to the agreed actions and/or (b) continuing to
give cause for concern.

8.

The Head of Student Wellbeing and Support (or nominee) will write to the
student after the meeting, setting out the arrangements made, and all relevant
parties - including the Academic Standards Officer and, in the case of a
safeguarding incident, Registry - will be sent a copy of the letter. The Head of
Student Wellbeing and Support (or nominee) is also responsible for keeping
the Student Wellbeing and Support Welfare Concern Group informed.

9.

The student’s case will continue to be monitored until all those involved agree
that there is no continuing cause for concern. At this point, the Head of
Student Wellbeing and Support (or nominee) will write to the student to
confirm that, unless there are any further concerns, the procedures have come
to an end. All relevant parties - including the Academic Standards Officer and,
in the case of a safeguarding incident, Registry - should be sent a copy of the
letter.

9.3

Stage Two Procedure

1.

Stage Two will be initiated if there is ongoing concern or evidence of
‘disturbing’ behaviour that might be a serious safeguarding concern to
themselves or others, a risk to their health, wellbeing or safety, or the good
order or reputation of the University, and if it is not possible to resolve these
concerns at Stage One.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Support to Continue in Study Procedure: page 5 of 10

2.

In such instances, a member of the Student Wellbeing and Support Welfare
Concern Group will immediately convene a meeting of the Group, which will
discuss and agree the next step. The Group will also appoint a member to
liaise with all concerned and make recommendations to the Head of Student
Wellbeing and Support (or nominee) as appropriate.

3.

A formal meeting (the arrangements for which will be as for the Stage One
Case Conference) will be called by the Head of Student Wellbeing and
Support (or nominee) to discuss the most appropriate course of action. The
student will have the right either to represent themselves at the first part of this
meeting, accompanied if desired, or to submit a written representation to the
Head of Student Wellbeing and Support (or nominee). If the student fails to
respond or attend, the case conference and formal adjudication may go ahead
in their absence.

4.

The formal meeting, chaired by the Head of Student Wellbeing and Support
(or nominee), will include representatives from the student’s academic
programme, the Marjon Student Union and the Student Wellbeing and Support
Welfare Concern Group. Their contribution, however, will be subject to Data
Protection legislation and/or professional codes of confidentiality.

5.

The student may choose to be accompanied by a friend, who should normally
be a student of the University or a representative of the Student Union.
Students with a disability also have the right to be accompanied by a support
worker (e.g. sign language interpreter or mental health worker) as appropriate
to their needs. The friend is permitted to attend to provide advice and quiet
support to the student, and can be heard only with the agreement of both the
student and the Chair. The Head of Student Wellbeing and Support (or
nominee) will write to the student, setting out the arrangements, and all
relevant parties including the Academic Standards Officer will be sent a copy
of the letter.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Support to Continue in Study Procedure: page 6 of 10

6.

In the event of extreme unacceptable behaviour or serious risk to the student
and/or other members of the University, a student may be denied access to
the University, both physically and virtually, with immediate effect at the point
of referral. The Vice-Chancellor or (in the Vice-Chancellor’s absence) the
Deputy Vice-Chancellor and Provost will confirm this, on the recommendation
of the Head of Student Wellbeing and Support (or nominee), either before or
after the case conference takes place. Any denial of access under this
provision will normally be reviewed at intervals of no more than one month and
the Student Wellbeing and Support Welfare Concern Group will continue to
provide support, co-ordinated by the appointed member, to the student during
this period.

7.

In exceptional cases those involved in the case conference may conclude, on
the basis of the available evidence, that extreme unacceptable behaviour or
serious risk to the student and/or other members of the University, is likely to
continue throughout the two-year period stipulated, in Section 8 of this
Framework (the Regulations for Academic Awards), as the maximum period
during which a student can remain registered without gaining credit. As this
will automatically result in a student’s registration coming to an end, they may
recommend to the Vice-Chancellor or (in the Vice-Chancellor’s absence) the
Deputy Vice-Chancellor and Provost, via the Head of Student Wellbeing and
Support (or nominee), that they should be excluded permanently with
immediate effect. The Academic Registrar must be notified immediately of any
such recommendation, copied to the Academic Standards Officer, and, in the
event of a safeguarding incident, Registry.

8.

The student’s case will continue to be monitored until:
•

it is agreed by all those involved that there is no continuing cause for
concern

•

the student withdraws, or

•

the student’s registration ceases, under Section 8 of this Framework (the
University’s Regulations for Academic Awards), on the basis that credit has
not been obtained for a period of at least two years.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Support to Continue in Study Procedure: page 7 of 10

At this point, the Head of Student Wellbeing and Support (or nominee) will
write to the student to confirm that the procedures have come to an end,
subject to their reactivation if this becomes appropriate. All relevant parties,
including the Academic Standards Officer and, in the event of a safeguarding
incident, Registry should be sent a copy of the letter.

9.4

Return to Study

1.

Where the outcome of either of the above Stages is interruption, the student’s
appointed member of the Student Wellbeing and Support Welfare Concern
Group will continue to monitor the student’s progress towards return and liaise
with all parties as necessary. The student will be required to provide sufficient
evidence, from an appropriate professional who has been working with the
student, to enable the Student Wellbeing and Support Welfare Concern Group
to recommend to the Academic Registrar (copied to the Academic Standards
Officer) that the student is ready to return to study after interruption. In
addition, the student may be required to agree a study support plan and/or
obtain formal medical clearance, for example by way of an Occupational
Health assessment. This is intended to respond to any ongoing support needs
the student has as well as providing terms for the student’s return. Should the
student not adhere to the terms, or concerns re-emerge or escalate,
proceedings can be re-instigated.

2.

The appointed member of staff will be responsible for continued monitoring
and co-ordinating support until the student no longer gives any cause for
concern.

3.

If, on the other hand, the Student Wellbeing and Support Welfare Concern
Group cannot recommend that the student is ready to return to study, it will
recommend a further period of interruption or withdrawal to the Academic
Registrar (copied to the Academic Standards Officer), stating the reasons for
their decision. The Vice-Chancellor or (in the Vice-Chancellor’s absence) the
Deputy Vice-Chancellor and Provost will confirm this, on the recommendation
of the Head of Student Wellbeing and Support (or nominee).

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Support to Continue in Study Procedure: page 8 of 10

4.

The Head of Student Wellbeing and Support (or nominee) will advise all
relevant parties - including the Academic Registrar (copied to the Academic
Standards Officer) and, in the event of a safeguarding incident, Registry - with
regard to return to study after interruption and any related issues.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Support to Continue in Study Procedure: page 9 of 10

Document Title

Plymouth Marjon University Student
Regulations Framework – Section 9 Fitness to
Continue in Study Procedure

Document Reference

L:\Student Regulations Framework\Student
Regulations Framework 2025-26

Version

3.12

Issuing Authority

Senate

Custodian

Academic Standards Officer

Document Date

16th October 2009

Last Amended

16th July 2025

Sensitivity

Unclassified

Circulation

Website

Effective from

September 2025

Review Date

Ongoing

Effective until

September 2026

History

Updated annually; new two-stage procedure drawn
up in May 2011 and confirmed with Head of
Student Wellbeing and Support. Subject to routine
ongoing revision thereafter.

Equality Impact Assessment

Preliminary EIA conducted for SRF, December
2010. Updated Equality Analysis Form to be
submitted.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Support to Continue in Study Procedure: page 10 of 10

10. FITNESS TO PRACTISE PROCEDURE
This section of the Student Regulations Framework applies to all taught
programmes of Plymouth Marjon University, whether undergraduate or
postgraduate, to all research degree students, and to all apprentices enrolled
on the University’s apprenticeship programmes, who are classified as
‘students’ and referred to accordingly throughout this Procedure.

10.1 Introduction
1.

Plymouth Marjon University offers a number of professionally accredited
programmes (as indicated in the relevant programme specifications). These
programmes are practice-centred and are directed towards the achievement of
professional competence. In such programmes, academic success alone may
not meet all of the professional requirements, for example, these might include
ethical, moral or behavioural matters and, in some situations, the impact of
certain physical and mental health conditions.

2.

Upon graduation, students must be able to contribute effectively to their
chosen profession and operate as competent professionals. This fitness to
practise procedure aims to ensure that students are fit to practise whilst also
helping to ensure user, client or pupil safety and public trust in the relevant
profession.

3.

Professionally accredited programmes must also comply with the regulations
and codes of professional conduct of their relevant controlling bodies,
including the Department for Education’s Teachers’ Standards and those set
by organisations known in the UK as Health and Social Care Regulators. The
application of the procedures will be informed by any relevant regulatorspecific guidance.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Fitness to Practise: page 1 of 19

4.

In addition, students may undertake placement or work-based learning
activities on any programme offered by the University, irrespective of its
professional accreditation status. Whilst these programmes are not practicecentred or directed towards the achievement of professional competence per
se, the University expects all students who are working in a professional
setting to conduct themselves in an appropriately professional manner at all
times. These procedures may be applicable to all students in respect of any
module in which placement or work-based learning activities occur. However,
their principal application is to professionally accredited programmes.

5.

These procedures are separate from the Student Misconduct Procedures (see
Section 15 of this Framework) and will only be invoked in cases where a
student’s behaviour is giving cause for concern with regard to their fitness to
practise. In addition, they will not apply when a decision to remove a student
from a professionally accredited programme has been made by an
Assessment Board. This is because such a decision can then be challenged
via the Academic Appeals procedure, which would be expected to take into
account the same evidence base that would have been considered under
these procedures. It may be appropriate, therefore, to defer any related
Assessment Board decision until these procedures are complete.

6.

If a student on a professionally accredited programme is giving cause for
concern, the Support to Continue in Study procedures might also need to be
invoked. In such cases, the Support to Continue in Study procedures will apply
to all aspects of study that do not involve placement opportunities or similar
contacts with external agencies. However, if the application of Support to
Continue in Study procedures result in the suspension of a student from their
programme of study, this will apply to a student’s entire programme of study
including any placements. In such cases, the suspension of the student will
lead to the automatic suspension of any Fitness to Practise procedures that
are ongoing.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Fitness to Practise: page 2 of 19

7.

Where students are already in the workplace and attending a programme
directly relating to their professional practise, either with or without the support
of their employer, the University may contact employers where it has identified
serious concerns about potential fitness to practise. This applies, in particular,
with regard to the safety of users, clients or pupils, other members of the
employer/placement provider and the student.

8.

The University accepts that different standards of behaviour will normally be
required of students at different stages of a programme. It recognises
professional training as a place where exploration takes place and accepts
that mistakes can, in fact, be made and addressed. However, it is also
constantly vigilant in ensuring that all students on professionally accredited
programmes are fit to practise in the relevant professional area. This involves
dealing promptly and appropriately with all cases in which fitness to practise is
in doubt.

9.

These procedures are conducted on the basis of ‘the balance of probabilities’ rather than the criteria of ‘beyond reasonable doubt’ which applies in criminal
cases - as they are civil, rather than criminal, procedures.

10.

Where a student submits a complaint during fitness to practise proceedings, it
may be appropriate to pause the fitness to practise process while the
complaint is being investigated. This will depend on the nature of the fitness to
practise concerns and the nature of the complaint, and how they relate to one
another.

11.

Students involved in the fitness to practise procedure are encouraged to make
use of support through the University’s Student Wellbeing and Support team,
the Marjon Student Union, or other sources as appropriate. If students have
any queries regarding the procedure or outcomes, they should contact the
Academic Standards Officer.

12.

The University can make reasonable adjustments to the procedure on a caseby-case basis to take account of the individual needs of students with
disabilities. Students are encouraged to discuss their requirements with the
Disability Team (Student Wellbeing and Support).

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Fitness to Practise: page 3 of 19

In addition, the University can consider making reasonable adjustments for
any student, where appropriate, to reflect their individual circumstances.
Students are encouraged to raise any such needs at any stage during the
fitness to practise process, so that the University can consider and implement
appropriate adjustments.

10.2 Acceptance on Programmes
1.

Before commencing a professionally accredited programme, each student
must undergo a Disclosure and Barring Service (DBS) check. If a student
would not fulfil the requirements of the relevant profession in this respect s/he
would not be admitted to study for that profession or to practise it. The
purpose of this DBS screening is to protect the safety of children and/or
vulnerable adults in the student’s care. This need to protect also applies to
students throughout their programme and to professionals in practise. It is the
responsibility of the student, alongside the University, to ensure that the DBS
has been completed prior to commencing the programme of study. It is the
responsibility of the student to inform the University of any criminal conviction,
caution, warning or reprimand received after they start their programme in
accordance with Section 2 of this Framework.

2.

In addition, trainee teachers must have the health and physical capacity to
teach, as set out in the Education (Health Standards) (England) Regulations
(2003). The University will ensure that only those with the capacity to teach
remain on the programme, using the guidance set out in Section 10.4 of this
Framework. Additional checks, as currently required by the Department for
Education, may also be applied as appropriate.

3.

In addition, the University will ensure that all students admitted onto its health
programmes are of good character and good health to ensure they can
practise safely and effectively. As such, additional checks may be applied and
declarations sought, as required by the relevant Health and Social Care
Regulators.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Fitness to Practise: page 4 of 19

10.3 Practice Placements
Practice in the care of users, clients or pupils is an essential part of
professionally accredited programmes. Students must be supervised by a
named individual who holds effective and appropriate registration or other
professional and academic qualifications as well as appropriate experience.

10.4 Professional Unsuitability
1.

Sometimes, it becomes apparent that a student may not be suitable for the
profession for which they are studying. The student, their tutors or a
placement provider may be the first to notice this. Any student who has doubts
about their suitability for the profession for which they are studying should
discuss the situation informally with a tutor as soon as possible. Where a
member of staff or placement provider feels that a student may be unsuitable,
the matter should be reported to the relevant member of University staff
responsible for supporting students during the placement period. They should
then discuss matters informally with the student. In some cases, the issues of
concern may be resolved by appropriate support and guidance. If the
unsuitability is expected to be temporary, an interruption of study may be
appropriate. If the matter cannot be resolved informally, or if there is a risk to
user, client or pupil care, the formal procedure will need to be invoked.

2.

Professional unsuitability can take various forms. The following are typical
examples, although this is not an exhaustive list:
•

Ongoing lack of motivation or interest and/or non-participation in learning
activities (e.g. direct care; engagement in small group/problem-based
learning; portfolio development; practise placements; presentations;
timetabled academic sessions; academic or pastoral tutorials; clinical skills
sessions).

•

Ongoing unwillingness or inability to accept guidance about involvement in
the programme/professional practise.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Fitness to Practise: page 5 of 19

•

Ongoing inability to make/evidence professional judgements over and
above personal value considerations as appropriate.

•

Inconsistent, unreliable and/or inappropriate behaviour in the clinical,
teaching, coaching and/or learning context, including inappropriate
appearance/failure to follow applicable dress codes, poor
timekeeping/attendance and inappropriate/excessive use of personal
digital devices such as mobile phones.

•

Emotional and/or inter-personal problems that adversely affect the clinical,
teaching, coaching and/or learning context.

•

Behaviour that adversely affects the operation of the clinical, teaching,
coaching and/or learning context, including a failure to maintain
appropriate boundaries with users, clients or pupils and/or patient
confidentiality.

•

Negligent misuse of social media in a placement or work-based learning
context (please see the University’s Social Media Policy for further
guidance).

•

Physical and/or mental health conditions, where the relevant adjustments
and appropriate support would not prevent the student or others being at
risk and/or where there has been a failure to seek help or engage with
appropriate services.

•

Competence issues: these would normally relate to whether the student
was able to practise competently and safely by the progression point in
each year of the programme. However, they could also stem from a holistic
assessment of the student’s capability, at the end of the programme, after
relevant adjustments and appropriate support had been offered / provided.

•

An inability, in a healthcare context, to recognise the duty of candour that
applies to users or clients when something has gone wrong with their
treatment or care, or which has the potential to cause harm or distress.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Fitness to Practise: page 6 of 19

•

Health and safety breaches resulting from negligence, rather than
malicious intent, on the part of the student.

•

A failure to self-reflect, indicating a lack of insight on the student’s part.

•

Poor communication and/or language skills which affect the student’s
ability to practise.

10.5 Interim Measures
1.

If there is evidence of a risk to user, client or pupil care at any point in these
Procedures, the Programme Leader/Programme Area Leader should notify
the Dean of Faculty. The Dean of Faculty may then authorise the immediate
removal of a student from a current or prospective placement until this risk is
no longer perceived to apply. Any such decision should be notified to the
Registry and Programme Support Office, via the Academic Registrar, in
writing.

2.

Under the terms of the Disclosure and Barring Service (DBS), and where the
student may have harmed a child or vulnerable adult, or put a child or
vulnerable adult at risk of harm, there is a legal requirement to refer the
student to the DBS. This action will be taken by the Registry Manager
(Applications, International & Compliance) (or nominee) under the authority of
the Academic Registrar.

3.

There could be times when it is considered that a referral should be made in
the interests of safeguarding children or vulnerable adults even if the student
has not been removed from regulated activity. This could include acting on
advice of the police or a safeguarding professional, or in situations where
there is insufficient evidence to dismiss or remove a person from working with
vulnerable groups.

4

The DBS is required by law to consider any and all information sent to it from
any source. This includes information sent where the legal referral conditions
are not met. The DBS will use legal powers and barring processes to

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Fitness to Practise: page 7 of 19

determine whether the person should be barred from working in regulated
activity with children and / or vulnerable adults.
5.

In addition, some programmes (such as Initial Teacher Training) will have
support mechanisms that are activated prior to these procedures. These are
as outlined in the relevant Programme Handbooks and/or the relevant
programme pages within the University’s Virtual Learning Environment.

10.6 Acceptable Behaviour
The University recognises that involvement in the fitness to practise procedure
can be a stressful experience for students. However, it also has a duty to
ensure the safety and well-being of its staff and, for example, will not accept
communication that is abusive; offensive or defamatory; aggressive;
threatening; coercive or intimidating and/or unreasonably persistent or
demanding. Such behaviour, therefore, might constitute an instance of student
misconduct (see Section 15 of this Framework).

10.7 Stage One Procedure – Programme Level
1.

If professional unsuitability is alleged, the placement supervisor/mentor,
personal tutor, Programme Leader/Programme Area Leader or other
appropriate member of academic staff will discuss the issue with the student
and advise them in writing of any concerns that they have about their conduct,
with the prior agreement of the Dean of Faculty. This would include any
remaining concerns that have not been resolved informally. They will also
supply the student with any relevant documents/reports that support these
allegations and direct them to appropriate sources of independent support
(such as the Student Union and Student Wellbeing and Support).

2.

The Programme Leader/Programme Area Leader will convene and chair a
meeting involving the student, their Personal Development Tutor and other
appropriate members of academic staff. Where appropriate, the placement

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Fitness to Practise: page 8 of 19

supervisor/mentor and a member of the institutional staff designated to
support students during the placement period will also attend. At the meeting,
the concerns and the student’s progress will be discussed with a view to
agreeing an action plan. The Programme Leader/Programme Area Leader will
communicate the outcome of the meeting, and of any subsequent meeting
held to review progress and/or to provide additional support, by letter to the
student. This letter, which should normally be sent within five working days of
the meeting and should be copied to the supervisor/mentor, Personal
Development Tutor, Dean of Faculty, the Academic Registrar, Registry and
Programme Support Office, the Academic Standards Officer and/or other
appropriate members of academic staff.
3.

The student’s case will continue to be monitored, normally by the originator of
the Stage One procedures, until all those involved agree that there is no
continuing cause for concern. At this point, the Dean of Faculty (or Associate
Dean) will write to the student to confirm that the procedures have come to an
end, subject to their reactivation if this becomes appropriate. All parties who
were sent a copy of the letter referred to in the previous paragraph should also
be sent a copy of the letter. If, on the other hand, the Programme
Leader/Programme Area Leader cannot recommend that the student is ready
to return to professional practice, they may recommend a further period of
removal from professional practice to the Dean of Faculty, stating the reasons
for their decision.

10.8 Stage Two Procedure - Investigation
1.

If the matter is not resolved by this course of action - or if the matter is so
serious that an immediate investigation is required - the Dean of Faculty (or
Associate Dean), on the advice of colleagues as appropriate, will initiate an
investigation, to be held as soon as reasonably possible. The investigator will
be a member of academic staff from the same Academic Department,
normally on another professionally accredited programme, who has had no
involvement with the student. The Dean of Faculty (or Associate Dean) will

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Fitness to Practise: page 9 of 19

inform the student that Stage Two has been initiated and invite them to an
interview which will proceed in the presence of the investigator and at least
one other member of the Academic Department.
2.

The investigator will collate and present the evidence that will determine
whether or not a student’s fitness to practise is impaired. The investigator will
take into account any relevant accrediting body criteria as notified to them by
the Programme Leader/Programme Area Leader.

3.

Following the investigatory interview with the student (at which the allegations
and any evidence which supports them will be made clear to the student), the
investigator may meet with others, e.g. institutional placement staff, placement
supervisor/mentor, witnesses to events and relevant professional practitioners.
The investigator shall examine the circumstances of the alleged unsuitability
from all perspectives, including that of the student, and maintain records of the
investigation including records of complaints, notes of meetings held,
interviews and statements.

4.

When the investigation is complete, subject to any deferral that might be
required to obtain a medical report, the investigator will submit a report to the
Dean of Faculty (or Associate Dean). If the Dean of Faculty (or Associate
Dean) considers, in the light of the investigator’s report, that the student’s
behaviour is insufficiently serious or persistent to call their fitness to practise
into question at the present time, they may determine the following courses of
action:
•

No further action.

•

To allow continued practise for a specified period, following which a further
assessment will be made.

•
5.

A formal warning to be placed on the student’s record.

The resultant decision letter, which should normally be sent within five working
days of the conclusion of the investigations, should be copied to the
supervisor/mentor, Personal Development Tutor, Programme
Leader/Programme Area Leader and/or other appropriate members of
academic staff as well as the Academic Registrar, Registry (in the case of a

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Fitness to Practise: page 10 of 19

safeguarding incident) and the Academic Standards Officer. Any documents
that have been explicitly taken into account in reaching a decision, where
these have not been supplied by the student, should be supplied to the
student at this point.

10.9 Stage Three Procedure – Fitness to Practise Panel
1.

If the Dean of Faculty (or Associate Dean) considers, in the light of the
investigator’s report, that the student’s behaviour is serious or persistent
enough to call their fitness to practise in question, the case will be referred to a
Fitness to Practise Panel. The investigator, however, will not serve on the
Panel. The Fitness to Practise Panel will consider evidence presented by the
investigator and the student, with a view to deciding whether the student’s
fitness to practise is impaired. Its decision will be taken with reference to the
balance between user, client or pupil and public safety, the interests of the
student and the need to maintain trust in the profession.

2.

The Dean of Faculty (or Associate Dean) will refer the matter accordingly to
the Academic Standards Officer by way of a report consisting of the
investigator’s report, the associated evidence and authorisation to proceed.
On receiving such a report, the Academic Standards Officer or nominee will
convene a Fitness to Practise Panel which shall comprise:
•

An appropriately qualified and experienced senior member of staff, from
the roster of Student Casework practitioners approved by the Academic
Registrar, who has had no involvement with the student and who teaches
or has taught on a professionally accredited programme.

•

A second appropriately qualified and experienced senior member of staff,
from the roster of Student Casework practitioners approved by the
Academic Registrar, who has had no involvement with the student.

•

A member of the Executive Committee of the Student Union, normally the
President or Deputy President, who also has no involvement with the
student.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Fitness to Practise: page 11 of 19

In addition, where practicable and at the request of the Chair, the Panel may
include up to two external advisors with professional expertise of the relevant
discipline. They may be academic colleagues at other institutions where the
discipline is taught, professional colleagues with appropriate knowledge and
experience, and/or service users in the case of health-related provision. The
advisors may attend the Panel hearing in person or provide written
commentary on the basis of the available evidence.
The Academic Standards Officer or nominee will act as Secretary to the Panel
and proceedings may also be recorded, either electronically or by a minute
taker, by mutual agreement. The Panel will not meet unless all members and
the Secretary are present. The Academic Standards Officer or nominee will
endeavour to ensure that the Panel includes at least one male and one female
member.
3.

The student shall be informed of the date of the meeting of the Panel not less
than ten working days in advance. This deadline can only be reduced with the
student’s written consent. They will be invited to appear in person but, in
exceptional circumstances, the Panel may also hear a case, at the discretion
of the Chair advised by the Academic Standards Officer or nominee, in their
absence. A Panel can be scheduled at any time in the calendar year;
however, reasonable steps will be taken to schedule this at a point in the year
when the student would normally be present in the University.

4.

The student may be accompanied by a ‘friend’, who is permitted to attend to
provide advice and support to the student and can be heard only with the
agreement of both the student and the Chair. The name and status of any
such ‘friend’ must normally be notified to the Academic Standards Officer or
nominee no less than five working days in advance of the hearing. The
University must grant its consent beforehand for the ‘friend’ to attend the
meeting, but requests by students to attend a hearing in the company of an
independent, knowledgeable and objective supporter from the relevant
profession will normally be accepted. The student may also choose to call
witnesses in their defence, including employees of the University where
appropriate.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Fitness to Practise: page 12 of 19

5.

The Academic Standards Officer or nominee shall normally circulate the list of
witnesses to be called, and all relevant documentation, to all parties not less
than five working days before the meeting. Where this is not possible, the
Academic Standards Officer or nominee will advise the student, who will have
the right to request a postponement. Additional papers supplied by or on
behalf of the student will be circulated thereafter with the proviso that, in
exceptional circumstances, the Panel may decide to adjourn a hearing in order
to secure a written response. The documentation will include any relevant
accrediting body criteria and/or institutional guidance, as notified to the
investigator by the Programme Leader/Programme Area Leader.

6.

The refusal or failure of a student to attend will not invalidate the Panel’s
proceedings, provided that they have been given sufficient notice as set out
above.

7.

At the outset of the hearing, the Chair of the Panel shall identify the issues to
be determined, the persons entitled to attend the hearing, and the documents
supplied to the Panel. They will also ask the student to confirm that they have
understood the procedures and have no concerns with regard to procedure.

8.

The Dean of Faculty, or a nominee, will then outline the case against the
student, before the Chair invites witnesses to give evidence. Members of the
Panel may question witnesses directly and the student, or their ‘friend’, may
question the Dean of Faculty, or nominee, and the witnesses through the
Chair.

9.

The Chair shall then invite the student, or their ‘friend’, to respond. The Chair
and other members of the Panel may question the student on the statement
and/or the documentary evidence. Witnesses may question the student
through the Chair.

10.

At the conclusion, the Chair shall offer the student the opportunity to make a
closing statement (which should not introduce new evidence), once the
witnesses have left, before the Panel considers its decision in private. In all
cases, the student shall have the right to make a final statement to the Panel
before it considers its decision.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Fitness to Practise: page 13 of 19

11.

The possible outcomes of a fitness to practise hearing include the following:
•

Fitness to practise is not impaired and the student has no case to answer.

•

Whilst there is evidence of inappropriate conduct, fitness to practise is not
currently impaired.

•
12.

The student’s fitness to practise is impaired and a sanction is appropriate.

The purpose of imposing a sanction is to protect users, clients or pupils and
the public, to maintain trust in the profession and to ensure that students
whose fitness to practise is impaired are dealt with effectively. Accordingly, if a
sanction is imposed, an appropriate rationale should be provided in the
decision letter.

13.

In order of severity, the sanctions available to the Panel include the following:
•

A formal warning to be placed on the student’s record.

•

An undertaking on the part of the student, to be reviewed after an
appropriate period of time.

•

Conditions on the student’s continued participation in the programme.

•

Suspension from the programme.

•

Removal from the programme, with the opportunity of transfer to an
appropriate stage of an alternative programme (if available) at an
appropriate time.

14.

The resultant decision letter will be drafted by the Academic Standards Officer
or nominee for the approval of the Chair. It shall also constitute the official
record of the hearing including, where this is applicable, the reasons for
imposing a specific penalty or penalties and an explanation as to why a lesser
penalty was unsuitable.

15.

The letter will normally be sent to the student within ten working days of the
hearing and within thirty-five working days of the commencement of the
Fitness to Practise Procedure at Stage One. If this is not possible,
exceptionally, the student will be kept informed.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Fitness to Practise: page 14 of 19

16.

Where a decision has been taken to suspend or remove a student from a
programme, it will take immediate effect. A decision to remove a student from
a programme will be referred to the Academic Registrar for implementation.

17.

If the University has a duty to inform the Independent Safeguarding Agency,
the Department for Education, a designated Health and Social Care Regulator
or any other Professional, Statutory or Regulatory Body of the outcome of any
Fitness to Practise proceedings, the decision letter will set out the notification
arrangements. These will vary according to the context - for example, there
may be an external requirement for educational institutions to report fitness to
practise cases as part of their annual reports, along with details of individual
students who have been subject to fitness to practise procedures.

18.

Where a student is not removed from a programme, their case will continue to
be monitored, normally by the originator of the Stage One procedures, for the
remainder of the academic year or until all those involved agree that there is
no continuing cause for concern. At this point, the Dean of Faculty (or
Associate Dean) will write to the student to confirm that the procedures have
come to an end, subject to their reactivation if this becomes appropriate. All
relevant parties should be sent a copy of the relevant communication.

10.10
1.

Right of appeal

At all stages of the process, a student has the right of appeal against the
decision and/or the penalty imposed on any or all of the following grounds:
•

that the procedures were not followed properly.

•

that the decision maker(s) reached an unreasonable decision.

•

that the student has new material evidence that they were unable, for valid
reasons, to provide earlier in the process.

•

that there was bias or reasonable perception of bias during the procedure.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Fitness to Practise: page 15 of 19

•

that the action the provider has decided to take is disproportionate or not
permitted under the procedures.

Any such appeal must be submitted in writing to the Academic Standards
Officer or nominee within ten working days of the date of the letter
communicating the decision.
2.

The Academic Standards Officer or nominee will refer the appeal to an
appropriately qualified and experienced senior member of staff, from the roster
of Student Casework practitioners approved by the Academic Registrar, who
has had no involvement with the student. The appeal stage will normally be
concluded within fifteen working days of the receipt of the appeal. If a delay is
envisaged, the appellant will be notified in writing before the end of the fifteen
working day period. If valid grounds to proceed with the appeal are not found,
the University’s Fitness to Practise Procedure will have been exhausted, and
the Academic Standards Officer or nominee will advise the student
accordingly.

3.

If, however, it is found that there may be additional evidence that could not
reasonably have been provided to the original hearing, or procedural
irregularities, the Academic Standards Officer or nominee will reconvene the
original decision-making body with new membership of a similar status. This
will always lead to an additional interview or hearing, under the procedures
appropriate to the relevant Stage, which will not involve the participation of
anyone involved in the original decision. This re-hearing will be final and there
will be no further right of appeal thereafter. In all such cases, the appeal
process may lead to the confirmation, reduction or quashing of any sanction
originally imposed, but not to an increased sanction.

4.

The student will be notified in writing of the decision, normally within five
working days of the hearing, in accordance with the procedures appropriate at
the relevant stage. The decision letter will confirm that the University’s Fitness
to Practise Procedure has been exhausted.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Fitness to Practise: page 16 of 19

10.11

Office of the Independent Adjudicator for Higher
Education

1.

If an appellant remains dissatisfied after the appropriate internal processes
have been exhausted, they can ask the University to issue a Completion of
Procedures letter in order for the Office of the Independent Adjudicator for
Higher Education (OIA) to review their appeal.

2.

The University must issue a Completion of Procedures letter in order for the
OIA to review an appeal. A Completion of Procedures letter will be issued
automatically where valid grounds for re-hearing the appeal are not found at
the review stage.

3.

All requests for review must be made to the OIA within twelve months of the
date of issue of a Completion of Procedures letter. For full details please
contact http://www.oiahe.org.uk.

10.12

Annual Report

Each year, the Academic Standards Officer submits a report on student
casework to Senate, detailing (anonymously) general matters or issues arising
from recent Fitness to Practise cases. Additional reports are also submitted to
the Finance and Resources Committee of the Board of Governors on a regular
basis. Senate will forward recommendations to other relevant University
committees so that broad concerns can be shared, and appropriate action
taken.

10.13
1.

Procedures at Partner Organisations

In accordance with the Good Practice Framework issued on behalf of the HE
sector by the Office of the Independent Adjudicator and Plymouth Marjon
University’s Collaborative Provision Regulations and Procedures, all students
registered for the University’s awards have the ultimate right to complain to the

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Fitness to Practise: page 17 of 19

University, irrespective of where they are studying. This right of complaint,
however, is not absolute and is subject to the precise wording of the
partnership agreement.
2.

The partner organisation, accordingly, should ensure that clear information
and guidance with regard to fitness to practise is made available to all
students registered for the University’s awards. This should include clear
information about the sequence of processes involved and make clear the
channels through which dissatisfied students can contact the University
directly.

3.

Once the internal procedures of the partner organisation have been fully
exhausted, students who wish to take their case to the University for review
should ask the Academic Standards Officer in writing if they are eligible to do
so. Students may request a review of the decision on the following grounds
only:
•

A review of the procedures followed at the formal stage.

•

A consideration of whether the outcome was reasonable in all the
circumstances.

•

New material evidence which the student was unable, for valid reasons, to
provide earlier in the process.

4.

If a case is eligible for review, the Academic Standards Officer or nominee will
refer the challenge to an appropriately qualified and experienced senior
member of staff, from the roster of Student Casework practitioners approved
by the Academic Registrar, who has no involvement with the partnership. If the
challenge is upheld, the case will be referred back to the partner organisation
to be reheard under its own procedures. Otherwise, the University will not refer
the case back to the partner organisation to be reheard and the Academic
Standards Officer or nominee will advise the student accordingly. This will
include advice with regard to a student’s further right of appeal to the Office of
the Independent Adjudicator (OIA).

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Fitness to Practise: page 18 of 19

Document Title

Plymouth Marjon University Student
Regulations Framework – Section 10 Fitness to
Practise Procedure

Document Reference

L:\Student Regulations Framework\Student
Regulations Framework 2025-26

Version

4.10

Issuing Authority

Senate

Custodian

Academic Standards Officer

Document Date

16th October 2009

Last Amended

16th July 2025

Sensitivity

Unclassified

Circulation

Website

Effective from

September 2025

Review Date

Ongoing

Effective until

September 2026

History

Updated annually and subject to routine ongoing
revision, informed by the Good Practice
Framework. Subject to substantial revision,
September 2017 to reinstate a Fitness to Practise
Panel in all instances at Stage 3 and to
accommodate the role of Health and Social Care
Regulators where applicable. Subject to minor
amendment on 29/09/22.

Equality Impact Assessment

Preliminary EIA conducted for SRF, December
2010. Updated Equality Analysis Form to be
submitted.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Fitness to Practise: page 19 of 19

11. ATTENDANCE, INTERRUPTION, WITHDRAWAL
AND FEES
This section of the Student Regulations Framework applies to all taught
programmes of Plymouth Marjon University, whether undergraduate or
postgraduate, and to all apprentices enrolled on the University’s
apprenticeship programmes, who are classified as ‘students’ and referred to
accordingly throughout this Procedure.

11.1 Attendance
1.

Students registered on programmes of study are required:
•

to be in attendance throughout the academic session, subject to the
specific requirements of their programme of study including scheduled
breaks

•

to participate fully in their studies

•

to be present at lectures, seminars, tutorials and other assigned academic
activities, including assessments

•

to submit work when required

•

to fulfil all other academic requirements of their programme.

Significant absences not only affect the performance of a student but also
reduce the benefits of participation for others. The University may withdraw
students from their programme if their participation has been unsatisfactory. If
funding is terminated due to non-attendance, students may not receive
support for future funding.
2.

An Academic Director, on the advice of the relevant Programme Leader or
Programme Area Leader and other relevant institutional staff, may refuse a
student access to placement, work experience or a practical activity if poor
attendance at preparatory sessions meant that the student would be illprepared for the activity, or would be a Health and Safety risk to themselves or
others. The relevant Programme Leader or Programme Area Leader will

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Attendance, Interruption, Withdrawal & Fees: page 1 of 8

communicate further information on the requirements for both attendance and
practical activity to students.
3.

Satisfactory attendance is a basic condition of accepting public finance for
higher education. The Student Loans Company and other relevant
Professional, Statutory and Regulatory Bodies require the University to inform
them within ten working days if a student fails to start a programme or ceases
to attend.

4.

The University is also required to notify UK Visas and Immigration if any
student who has been issued with a Certificate of Acceptance to Study (CAS)
fails to start a programme, ceases to attend, is absent due to illness for an
extended period of time, or has a consistently poor record of attendance (for
example, frequent unexplained absences) and is withdrawn from the
programme.

5.

If an attendance, engagement or progression issue has been identified by a
Module Leader, they will contact the Programme Leader, Personal
Development Tutor and Student Wellbeing and Support without delay to
ascertain the reasons for the student’s absence. Where there is no known
reason, the Personal Development Tutor will contact the student informally by
telephone and/or email, providing advice with regard to the possible
consequences of non-attendance. If there is still no response after ten working
days’ non-attendance, the Personal Development Tutor will ask the Registry
and Programme Support Office to contact the student in writing. If the student
does not respond within a further five working days, the Personal
Development Tutor will advise the Registry and Programme Support Office to
withdraw the student. The Registry and Programme Support Office will then
update the student’s record and inform them of this action and their fee liability
for the period.

6.

Students who require a leave of absence due to legitimate medium to long
term commitments (including maternity or paternity) should contact Student
Wellbeing and Support as soon as is practicable, to enable the relevant
support to be put in place.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Attendance, Interruption, Withdrawal & Fees: page 2 of 8

7.

Students who are not enrolled on distance learning programmes are expected
to reside either on the University campus, or within a practicable daily
commuting distance of it. The University reserves the right to terminate a
student’s registration, in exceptional circumstances, if their location makes it
impossible for them to travel to the campus and back in a single day.

11.2 Absence through Illness
Students prevented by illness from taking part in their programme for more
than seven successive days should ensure that a certificate signed by a
medical practitioner is submitted to the Programme Leader or Programme
Area Leader, or to a representative of Student Wellbeing and Support who will
forward the form to the Programme Leader or Programme Area Leader on the
student’s behalf. Please note that medical conditions that develop during a
programme may be subject to occupational health investigation to comply with
professional body requirements.

11.3 Interruption of Studies
1.

Circumstances sometimes arise which make it very difficult for students to
continue with their studies. It may be possible to arrange an interruption of
studies subject to the maximum period of registration permitted for the
programme of study. Representatives of Student Wellbeing and Support will
advise on academic implications and financial consequences. Deadlines for
requesting an interruption of studies are normally set around 4 weeks before
the student’s final assessment board each year.

2.

The digital Interruption form is available on Antler and MyMarjon. Students
must inform the Registry and Programme Support Office of any changes to
their registration via the appropriate form, and a failure to do so may make a
student liable for repayment of loans.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Attendance, Interruption, Withdrawal & Fees: page 3 of 8

3.

The assessment results of students who interrupt or withdraw during the
academic year will be handled as described in Section 11.6 of this Framework
below. This will enable return at an agreed point in the subsequent academic
year.

4.

If a student has interrupted their studies for more than two years, the
Progression and Award Board will normally exclude them from their
programme in accordance with the University’s Regulations for Academic
Awards (see Section 8.8 of this Framework).

5.

The unavailability of modules and/or the constraints imposed by the University
timetable may affect the resumption of studies. A condition of students being
permitted to interrupt their studies is that they must accept any such
consequences. Poor academic progress is not an acceptable reason for
interruption of studies and a student must not gain an assessment advantage
through interruption of studies. Therefore, all assessment marks (including any
zeros) for the period up to and including the date of interruption must stand.
Students are subject to the regulations in force at the time of return, inclusive
of any increase in tuition fee.

6.

Students who interrupt on health grounds are required to provide evidence,
from an independent professional, indicating that they are fit to resume prior to
re-registration with the University. The names of students interrupting on
health grounds will be forwarded to Student Wellbeing and Support so that the
appropriate support can be put in place.

11.4 Withdrawing from the University
1.

Students who are considering withdrawing from the University should contact
Student Wellbeing and Support for advice in the first instance. If they decide to
withdraw, they must complete the digital Withdrawal Form available on Antler
and MyMarjon and ensure that books borrowed from the Library have been
returned, accounts due have been settled and accommodation agreements

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Attendance, Interruption, Withdrawal & Fees: page 4 of 8

properly terminated. The University will make every effort to recover debts,
and this may involve outside agencies.
2.

If a student intends to transfer to another institution this should be indicated on
the Withdrawal Form and relevant details provided. Failure to do this, under
government guidelines, could jeopardise future funding as students may be
deemed to have withdrawn from all study and funding may be terminated.

3.

The Withdrawal form will ask the student for their date of last attendance in
order to minimise liability for fees and other expenses due to the University
and/or funding organisations such as the Student Loans Company. This date
will be verified with the Programme Leader. They must also ensure that the
University is aware of any changes to their registration. Failure to inform the
Registry and Programme Support Office in writing via the appropriate form will
mean that the student may be liable for repayment of loans.

4.

The University asks students, by way of the Withdrawal form, for their reasons
for withdrawing. This is to ensure that it is providing the appropriate services
and support. If a student responds, then the data will be anonymised and used
only for this purpose.

5.

If a student is withdrawn following a decision by the Progression and Award
Board, the date of the Board meeting will be recorded as the student's last
date of attendance.

11.5 Tuition Fees
1.

Unless other funding arrangements are in place, students are required to pay
tuition fees for their programme of study, as set out in the appropriate fee
schedule. Students must pay tuition fees as part of the registration process
and/or provide proof of a tuition fee loan in the form of the authorising letter
from the funding partnership.

2.

Students cannot complete registration until payment arrangements have been
made with the Finance Office. Moreover, please note that any student who

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Attendance, Interruption, Withdrawal & Fees: page 5 of 8

fails to pay tuition fees may be withdrawn from the course until all debt
for the year is paid in full.
3.

Part-time and modular fees are pro-rata to the full-time fees according to the
credit value of the modules.

4.

The University will make every effort to recover outstanding tuition fees, and
this may involve outside agencies.

11.6 Recording of Module Results for Students who Withdraw or
Interrupt
1.

A student who withdraws from or interrupts their programme of study before
the first assessment submission date will be given the module free of
consequence – i.e. the module(s) will not form part of their profile for that year,
and, if they return, the module(s) will be taken as an uncapped first attempt.

2.

A student who withdraws or interrupts after the final assessment deadline for
that module has passed will be deemed to have completed that module and
the marks for any assessment due will be taken to the next set of Boards. The
student will be deemed as having had an attempt at the module(s);
subsequent attempts at the module(s) or their direct replacements will then be
capped at the module pass mark.

11.7 Fees Policy for Students who Withdraw or Interrupt
1.

Students who withdraw prior to the end of their programme will be liable to a
pro-rata fee payment for the time spent on their programme of study on the
following basis. Dates based on the standard term dates are given below for
indicative purposes only and are not exhaustive: in the case of non-standard
entry, students who withdraw will be charged in accordance with the terms of
the specific provision.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Attendance, Interruption, Withdrawal & Fees: page 6 of 8

•

Students withdrawing or interrupting for any reason between the start date
of course plus 27 calendar days inclusive will be exempted from fees. This
equates to a period of 28 calendar days.

•

Students withdrawing or interrupting for any reason, between day 29 of the
programme and the end of 16 weeks from the programme start date, will
be charged 25% of the tuition fee as set out in the fee schedule.

•

Students who withdraw or interrupt after 16 weeks but before the end of 32
weeks from the programme start date will be charged 50% of the tuition fee
as set out in the fee schedule.

•

Students who withdraw or interrupt after the end of 32 weeks from the
programme start date will be charged 100% of the tuition fees as set out in
the fee schedule.

•

In all of the above, any part of a week shall be charged as a full week
calculated up to and including the following Friday.

2.

Students returning to study after interruptions from the previous academic
year(s) will be treated as continuing students for fee purposes, and will be
liable for the balance of the tuition fee as published in the fee schedule for the
current year.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Attendance, Interruption, Withdrawal & Fees: page 7 of 8

Document Title

Plymouth Marjon University Student
Regulations Framework – Section 11
Attendance, interruption, withdrawal and fees

Document Reference

L:\Student Regulations Framework\Student
Regulations Framework 2025-26

Version

3.13

Issuing Authority

Senate

Custodian

Academic Standards Officer

Document Date

16th October 2009

Last Amended

16th July 2025

Sensitivity

Unclassified

Circulation

Website

Effective from

September 2025

Review Date

Ongoing

Effective until

September 2026

History

Updated annually and subject to routine ongoing
revision, most recently in February 2023.

Equality Impact Assessment

Preliminary EIA conducted for SRF, December
2010. Updated Equality Analysis Form to be
submitted.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Attendance, Interruption, Withdrawal & Fees: page 8 of 8

12. ASSESSMENT PRACTICES
This section of the Student Regulations Framework applies to all taught
programmes of Plymouth Marjon University, whether undergraduate or
postgraduate, and to all apprentices enrolled on the University’s
apprenticeship programmes, who are classified as ‘students’ and referred to
accordingly throughout this Procedure.

12.1 Introduction
1.

Plymouth Marjon University has defined a range of assessment regulations
and procedures that underpin the maintenance of standards within the
University. These are detailed in Section 3 of this Framework. All its
assessment and classification conventions are in the public domain, including
the procedures of Module Assessment Boards (MABs), the procedures of
Progression and Award Boards (PABs), the work of External Examiners and
procedures relating to the disclosure of marks to students.
Assessment design, approval and review

2.

Identifying appropriate assessment opportunities and criteria is important
when designing a programme. The University has adopted programme design
criteria which are informed by the expectations and practices set out in the UK
Quality Code For Higher Education and OfS B conditions. The University’s
approach to assessment is also aligned to the QAA advice and guidance
relating to assessment.

3.

Responsibility for the quality and standards of assessment lies with the
designated members of academic staff. The University’s Strategies and
Policies provide the supportive framework.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Assessment Practices: page 1 of 23

4.

Validation and review of programmes involves scrutiny of assessment
processes. The Periodic Review and Validation Panels follow the guidelines
on assessment published by the University. As good practice, during the
review, the amount and type of assessment should be addressed.

5.

The collection of feedback from students, through a number of routes, is an
integral part of programme review. Informal feedback can occur through the
Programme Leader or Programme Area Leader, through module tutors, and/or
through Personal Development Tutors. Formal feedback is via mid-module
review and semester/term evaluations, which specifically ask for feedback on
assessment methods and loads. In addition, Programme Voice Panels provide
further opportunities for assessment issues to be addressed and to consider
External Examiner reports. Student feedback is systematically referred into the
University's quality mechanisms at the appropriate level.
Programme assessment procedures

6.

University-wide procedures for the smooth running of programme
assessments are adopted in order to ensure that there is internal consistency
and external confidence in the University’s standards. These are made explicit
to staff and students in the relevant University documentation.
Responsibilities for supervising assessment and related procedures

7.

At the programme level, the day-to-day responsibility for assessment lies with
module teams. Individual tutors are responsible for setting, marking, making
arrangements for second marking / moderating work, recording provisional
marks, and returning the work to students on time.

8.

At the University level overall responsibility for assessment and related
procedures lies with Senate. The Academic Registrar is responsible for
oversight, with appropriate devolved management, of the administration of
examination processes, assessment boards and recognition of prior learning.
The Academic Standards Officer manages appeals and complaints
procedures within the Quality and Academic Standards Unit.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Assessment Practices: page 2 of 23

9.

The Registry and Programme Support Office will make arrangements for
examinations and for timetabled in-class tests that directly contribute to final
module marks, as defined by the University’s Assessments Calendar. Module
Leaders are also responsible for ensuring that any additional arrangements for
students are adhered to for practical examinations and presentations.

10.

Deans of Faculty, Academic Directors, Programme Leaders, Programme Area
Leaders and External Examiners have significant responsibilities for
maintaining standards on particular programmes. These are defined in the
University's Annual Monitoring Procedures and in Section 3 of this
Framework.

12.2 Module assessment
All taught modules have a set content and form of assessment (including the
weighting of elements of assessment). Students are provided with information
relating to assessment, at the beginning of their module, by their programme
teams through the programme/module information available on the
University’s Virtual Learning Environment. The content of this information
conforms to the approved Programme Specification and Module Descriptors.
Students must attempt all components and elements of a modules
assessment in order to pass the module - this includes all elements of a
portfolio where this is an assessment mode of the module.

12.3 Programme Assessment
1.

Submission dates for all programme assignments are provided by programme
teams at the start of each module, and are published in the
programme/module information available on the University’s Virtual Learning
Environment. Changes to the published submission date may only be
changed if:
•

there is good reason for doing so

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Assessment Practices: page 3 of 23

2.

•

that doing so will not impact adversely on students’ assessment schedules

•

all registered students have been informed in writing in advance

Students will be given target word counts or equivalents for programme
assessments. The instructions for the assessment should make the
consequences of exceeding or failing to reach the word count clear before the
student undertakes the assessment and this should be further noted in the
Programme Specification.

3.

Word counts include footnotes, quotes and reference citations within the text
of the work. The following elements are normally excluded from the word
count, unless otherwise specified in the assessment brief: titles; abstracts;
acknowledgements; table of contents; list of abbreviations; reference list;
bibliography; appendices; captions for images, figures and tables.

4.

Programme assessments must be submitted via the appropriate means in a
format agreed by the Module Leader, normally via Turnitin. Submissions made
in the absence of Turnitin must have the University’s signed programme
assessment report form or agreed equivalent attached. A receipt recording the
student number and the exact time of submission will be issued or recorded
via the electronic audit trail inherent to a Turnitin submission. Where required
the receipt should be retained by the student as proof of submission until after
publication of the results relating to that module.

5.

The University may make and authorise third parties to make copies of any
work submitted for assessment but only for the following purposes:
•

assessment of work

•

comparison with databases of earlier answers or works or other previously
available works to confirm that a student’s work is original

•

addition to databases of works used to ensure that future works submitted
at this institution and others do not contain content from a student’s work

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Assessment Practices: page 4 of 23

•

To align to the OfS requirement to retain appropriate records of assessed
student work, including for students who are no longer registered on a
course, for a period of five years after the end date of a course.

The University will not make any more copies than are necessary for these
purposes, will only use copies made for these purposes and will only retain
such copies as remain necessary for those purposes.
6.

The Programme Leader or Programme Area Leader will provide students with
further details concerning the arrangements for the submission of programme
assessments, including resit work, at the beginning of the academic session.
The feedback is returned to students, either on the programme assessment
report form or other agreed format. A copy of the feedback is also made
available to the appropriate office.

7.

The University requires marked work to be returned to students with feedback
within twenty working days of the submission deadline. If there are reasons
beyond the marker’s control why this will not be possible, the Module Leader
must inform all students of the reason for the delay, and state the date by
which students can expect to receive their returned programme assessments.

8.

N.B. - all marks remain provisional until recommended by the relevant
Module Assessment Board.

9.

Non-submission of programme assessments will be awarded a mark of zero
(in accordance with the University generic grade descriptors, as set out in
Section 12.6 of this Framework).

12.4 Penalties for Late Submission
1.

Extensions to submission dates for programme assessments for individual
students are not permitted. A student who is unable to meet a submission date
for a programme assessment (and this includes an approved flexible
submission date), must consult the Extenuating Circumstances procedures
described in Section 4 of this Framework.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Assessment Practices: page 5 of 23

2.

Programme assessments submitted after the published submission time and
date, but within seven calendar days of that date, will be marked. The mark
awarded will be subject to a reduction of ten marks per day (or part of a day,
and by this anything received after the deadline will be considered to be a day
late and so on), for a maximum of seven calendar days or until the module
pass mark has been reached. In each case, the mark the work merits will also
be shown on the programme assessment. This does not apply to resit work,
which is already capped at the module pass mark. Resit work submitted after
the deadline will receive a mark of zero.

3.

Work submitted manually more than seven calendar days after the published
submission date will be marked for formative purposes only, but a mark of
zero will be awarded and recorded.

4.

The assessment penalties described above may only be waived if the student
has successfully applied for Extenuating Circumstances. Therefore, the marks,
as described above, remain until the Module Assessment Board meets and
responds to the Registry and Programme Support Office’s recommendations.

5.

If Extenuating Circumstances have been deemed valid, the Module
Assessment Board will take the appropriate course of action. All actions will be
recorded in the MAB minutes.

6.

All work will receive written feedback, irrespective of whether or not the work
can achieve its actual grade.

7.

These late submission penalties apply only to standard numerically marked
assessment. For all non-standard assessment, students should refer to the
relevant Module Descriptor.

12.5 Marking Procedures
1.

The University’s approach to marking is shaped by the expectations, practices
and guidance set out in the UK Quality Code For Higher Education, OfS B

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Assessment Practices: page 6 of 23

conditions and by practice across the sector as communicated by its External
Examiners.
Anonymous marking
2.

The general marking practice for modules delivered at Level 5 or above is that
for summative assessment, where possible, the identity of the student should
be unknown to the marker(s).

3.

Every examination script for modules delivered at Level 5 or above should be
marked anonymously wherever possible. Any exemption to this requirement at
programme level should be recorded on the programme specification.

4.

Where possible, programme assessments for modules delivered at Level 5 or
above will be marked anonymously. At the beginning of a module, students
will be notified via programme and module information of those assessed
activities for which their anonymity will be preserved and those for which it will
not.
Double marking

5.

Double marking is where two markers assess the work. The purpose of double
marking is to ensure the accuracy and consistency of marking, and thus to
verify the marks. A sample reflecting the range of marks and classifications
should enable the two markers to ensure that they are marking consistently
and accurately against assessment criteria and grade descriptors.

6.

Student work for assessment is sample double marked internally and made
available to external examiners. The minimum sample is either the square root
of n (where n is the number of students on the module), rounded up to the
nearest whole number, or a sample of 5 assignments where this is greater. In
addition, if there is more than one first marker, at least two assignments
should be reviewed per marker. Marks are usually only recorded on the work
once the double marking process is complete. It is the expectation that all
Level 6 and 7 dissertations and honours projects are double marked.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Assessment Practices: page 7 of 23

7.

Blind double marking is where the student work is independently assessed by
two markers, neither of which is aware of any comments made or mark
awarded by the other. Any assessment may be double blind marked on a
discretionary basis, although this is more likely to apply to individual pieces of
work constituting at least 75% of the assessment of modules which are greater
than 20 credits and where the credits contribute to the final award.

8.

Once double marking (including blind double marking) has taken place, first
and second markers agree marks for each assessment. Ordinarily, if the
marks are within a 5% tolerance band, the first marker’s grade should be
maintained. Where the double marking process reveals that markers are more
than 5% apart, they will need to agree the grade for the individual piece of
work. Should the double marking process result in marks falling outside the
5% tolerance band for two or more assessments within the sample, then the
entire corpus of grades should be reconsidered, and moderated as necessary,
to ensure that a consistent approach is maintained across all assessments on
a module.

9.

Exceptionally, where no agreement can be reached between first and second
markers, a third party, who must have appropriate subject expertise and
standing and be a member of the relevant Academic Department, should mark
the work and adjudicate. The decisions of the third marker, which should be
clearly recorded, are final. External Examiners must not be used to resolve
marking disagreements.

10.

Once double marking has taken place, the full set of marks for the assessment
can be confirmed. Marks can then be entered on the programme assessment
report form and the work returned to the students. Similarly, marks for
examinations can be recorded on the module marksheet. No assessments, or
marks, should be returned to students unless the set of marks, as a whole,
has been agreed.

11.

Markers should maintain clear records which should be available to other
markers and External Examiners, as necessary. However, whilst markers’
records identify a mark and provide a justification for this judgement, the

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Assessment Practices: page 8 of 23

programme assessment report form should only present the final, agreed
mark, and feedback which warrants the grade, so as to provide students with
clear and helpful information.
Moderation
12.

Module teams should review the patterns of the full range of marks for
elements of assessments within a module. The review may consider the
pattern of marks in relation to

13.

•

Other assignments

•

Previous history of the module

•

Other modules on this and other programmes

•

External norms

Action resulting from moderation could involve the rescaling of the entire
assignment, if the pattern of marks is considered to be anomalous or, if it
displays no pattern at all, remarking of an entire assessment may be
necessary. Moderation should be used in annual monitoring of modules and
could be taken as evidence for the need for a modification to the learning,
teaching and assessment of the module. Evidence of moderation should be
kept and shared with the External Examiner.
External examiners

14.

In addition to internal double marking and moderation as described above, all
student work for assessment is subject to sampling by the External Examiner
appointed with responsibility for the relevant cognate group of modules. The
size and nature of the sample and the rights and responsibilities of the
External Examiner are described in the University’s Handbook for External
Examiners and Moderators, but the External Examiner has the right of access
to all assessed work at all FHEQ Levels.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Assessment Practices: page 9 of 23

12.6 Marking and Grading
1.

The following scheme is used in all summative assessment for Honours
degrees.

CLASS AND NUMERICAL EQUIVALENT
First class

70-100

Upper second

60-69

Lower second

50-59

Third

40-49

Fail

1-39

No work submitted 0
2.

The following scheme is used in all summative assessment for undergraduate
programmes other than Honours Degrees (or the related exit awards).
GRADE AND NUMERICAL EQUIVALENT
Distinction

70-100

Merit

60-69

Pass

40-59

Fail

1-39

No work submitted 0
3.

The following scheme is used in all summative assessment in Master’s level
programmes.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Assessment Practices: page 10 of 23

GRADE AND NUMERICAL EQUIVALENT
Distinction

70-100

Merit

60-69

Pass

50-59

Fail

1-49

No work submitted 0
4.

Unless an assignment has ‘absolute’ answers then the following grade points
will apply within each classification band:
•

High – threshold plus 8% (58%, 68% etc.)

•

Medium – threshold plus 5% (55%, 65% etc.)

•

Low – threshold plus 3% (53%, 63% etc.)

•

Pass – threshold plus 0% (50%, 60% etc.)

The purpose of this is to enhance clarity and consistency across the marking
process.
5.

The University has developed Generic Grade Descriptors, which inform
assessment across its programmes in a non-prescriptive manner. The
Descriptors focus on the development of knowledge and understanding and
intellectual skills. Each grade presented assumes that the lower level criteria
have been achieved. Staff are encouraged to mark across the full range of
grades.

LEVELS 4, 5 and 6
1st (90–100%). Outstanding work which:
•

demonstrates analytical and critical acumen

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Assessment Practices: page 11 of 23

•

demonstrates the ability to develop and sustain a personal judgement
which is well grounded in leading current research

•

demonstrates the ability to present a clear, structured, articulate and
persuasive argument

1st (80–90%). Exceptional work which:
•

demonstrates thorough, critical understanding of current knowledge

•

demonstrates a critical awareness of the principles and practices of the
discipline

1st (70–79%). Excellent work which:
•

demonstrates a thorough and comprehensive understanding of the
discipline

•

shows evidence of extensive, relevant reading which includes up-to-date
research

•

reveals originality and insight

•

demonstrates ability to critically evaluate complex ideas

2.1 (60–69%). Very good work which:
•

demonstrates a sound understanding of the discipline

•

shows effective and competent use of literature

•

demonstrates a clear understanding of complex ideas

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Assessment Practices: page 12 of 23

•

demonstrates the ability to analyse, interpret and organise information
effectively

•

demonstrates a wide reading base

•

is a clear, concise and well-structured presentation

2.2 (50–59%). Good work which:
•

demonstrates a generally sound understanding of the discipline

•

makes good use of relevant literature

•

demonstrates ability to synthesise information into a clear, well-structured
account / argument

3rd (40–49%). Fair work which:
•

demonstrates an understanding of the discipline

•

shows evidence of relevant reading

•

demonstrates ability to work towards tasks set, but more descriptive than
analytical

•

demonstrates the ability to organise work appropriately

Borderline fail (35-39%). Weak work which:
•

demonstrates a basic understanding of the discipline

•

demonstrates some evidence of reading

•

demonstrates evidence of broadly working towards the task(s) set

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Assessment Practices: page 13 of 23

Weaknesses may be identified in one or more of the following:
fragmentary coverage; errors and omissions; organisation and presentation;
misconceptions; inclusion of irrelevant information; misinterpretation of
instructions.

Fail (30-34%). Inadequate work which:
•

demonstrates a basic and partial understanding of the discipline

•

some evidence of reading

•

limited focus on task(s) set

Inadequacies may be identified in one or more of the following:
assessment guidelines not followed; little engagement with the discipline;
errors / omissions; poorly presented work.

Fail (20-29%). Poor work which:
•

demonstrates little understanding of the discipline

Poor work may be evidenced by one or more of the following:
basic misunderstanding or misinterpretations; inability to meet the
requirements of the assessment; poor organisation and presentation; inclusion
of inappropriate material.

Fail (10-19%). Incompetent work which:
•

demonstrates very limited evidence of understanding of the discipline

•

follows few or none of the tasks set

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Assessment Practices: page 14 of 23

Incompetent work may be evidenced by one or more of the following:
inclusion of irrelevant information; little evidence of engagement with the task;
little evidence of engagement with the discipline.

Fail (1-9%). Unacceptable work which:•

demonstrates minimal or no understanding of the discipline

Unacceptable work may be evidenced by one or more of the following:
work which is not presented in an acceptable manner; work which is not
written in an appropriate manner; work which does not evidence appropriate
reading; no evidence of engagement with the discipline.

Fail (0%). Non-submission.

LEVEL 7 PROGRAMMES
Pass with Distinction (90-100%). Work which:
• is thought-provoking, presenting challenging evidence-based insights and
proposals
• work which is of publishable quality

Pass with Distinction (80-89%). Work which:
•

contributes to the knowledge base of the discipline

•

effectively challenges theoretical frameworks

•

displays methodological rigour

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Assessment Practices: page 15 of 23

•

demonstrates qualities consistent with publishable material

Pass with Distinction (70-79%). Work which:
•

demonstrates confident, detailed and informed knowledge of the discipline

•

demonstrates qualities of self-critical, independent learning

•

displays a confident / competent grasp of complex issues

•

displays evidence of originality and innovation

Pass with Merit (60-69%). Work which:
•

demonstrates a secure and relevant knowledge base

•

is analytical in style and critical in interpretation

•

demonstrates a fluent style and uses an appropriate language

Pass (50-59%). Work which:
•

demonstrates a competent understanding of the discipline

•

reveals knowledge and understanding of key issues

•

addresses issues within a structured framework

•

demonstrates analytical and critical acumen

•

is well organised and presented

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Assessment Practices: page 16 of 23

Condonable Fail (40-49%). Work which:
•

displays relevant knowledge of the discipline

•

reveals some evidence of a systematic, coherent and analytical
engagement with the discipline

•

is generally competent but may be conceptually weak

•

contains irrelevant materials

Fail (30-39%). Work which:
•

demonstrates limited understanding of the discipline

•

reveals weaknesses / flaws in argument

•

uses an insufficient range of sources

•

has a poor style / structure

•

is partially incomplete

Fail (20-29%). Work which:
• displays insufficient engagement with or lack of understanding of the
discipline
• shows limitations in the ability to formulate / sustain a clear argument
• does not meet the expectations of the task set

Fail (10-19%). Work which:
• has serious errors and / or major omissions

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Assessment Practices: page 17 of 23

• is poorly communicated / presented
• is incomplete / does not focus on the task set

Fail (1-9%). Work which:
•

unacceptable work which lacks evidence of understanding the discipline

•

includes inappropriate / irrelevant information

•

lacks any evidence of an appropriate reading base

•

has marginal or no engagement with the task

Fail (0%). Non-submission.
6.

Transcripts record the numerical marks obtained for modules (which are
presented as whole numbers with any decimal below x.50 being rounded
down and any decimal of x.50 or above being rounded up).

12.7 Criteria Used in Assessment
The assessment criteria of particular assignments are based on the
University’s generic level and grade descriptors, UK qualification and
classification descriptors and the QAA Outcome classification descriptors for
FHEQ Level 6. Students should be made aware of these criteria, and of any
additional criteria upon which their work is being judged.

12.8 Examination Timetables
1.

The Registry and Programme Support Office supports examinations organised
by the module leaders, including the equivalent within a digital context. Exams

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Assessment Practices: page 18 of 23

will be timetabled by the module leader to take place during the University’s
Assessment weeks. Exams scheduled outside of the designated Assessment
Weeks will not be centrally administered and must instead be organised and
managed by the individual programme teams. Please note that the
arrangements set out below may need to be varied in a digital context,
and that appropriate advice will be issued if this is the case.
2.

Module Leaders are responsible for providing assessment details, including
those for in-class tests, to the Programmes Office by the start of September
each academic year. Students may have examinations on consecutive days
and up to two examinations on one day. Students should make sure that they
are punctual for University examinations in accordance with given instructions.
Examination information is posted on the University’s Virtual Learning
Environment.

3.

Academic Departments are responsible for issuing examination papers, where
applicable, in advance for seen examinations. Papers will be available from
the Programmes and Partnerships Office fifteen working days before the date
of the examination.

12.9 Additional Examination Arrangement Requests
1.

Additional examination arrangements are normally requested by the
University’s Disability and Inclusion Advice Service (DIAS) team.

2.

If requests have not been made in sufficient time for the additional
arrangement to be made, normally at least ten working days before the date of
the examination, the student should not attempt the examination without the
additional arrangements but make use of the Extenuating Circumstances
procedure to seek a deferral. Additional Arrangements are put into place by
the Programmes Office which notifies students of the details of their
examination.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Assessment Practices: page 19 of 23

12.10 General information on examinations
1.

Candidates will be identified on examination scripts or answer book covers by
student numbers only. They should bring their library card or other
photographic identification to all their examinations where physical attendance
is required.

2.

No unauthorised materials or equipment should be taken into Examinations
Halls/Rooms.

3.

Students should refer to the published Examination process and code of
conduct on MyMarjon for detailed information about examinations.

4.

Candidates will have access to equipment facilities appropriate to the
examination type and their own additional arrangements.

5.

Students would not normally have an entitlement to have access to their
examination scripts. Access to examination scripts, if requested by a student,
is at the discretion of individual programme teams. Should access to a script
be granted, this should be limited and supervised, and under no
circumstances should a student be permitted to remove the script from the
Academic Department.

12.11 Absence from an Examination
1.

If a student is prevented by serious circumstances from attending any
examination or part of any examination they must follow the extenuating
circumstances procedure in Section 4 of this Framework.

2.

In the absence of valid extenuating circumstances, a student who misses an
assessment will be deemed to have failed it and a mark of zero will be
awarded.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Assessment Practices: page 20 of 23

12.12 Notification of results
1.

Registry will notify students of their confirmed marks, the decisions of
Progression and Award Boards and the consequences of those decisions by
way of a password protected page that may be accessed directly at Login
(marjon.ac.uk) .

2.

Provisional marks may also be issued in certain circumstances for general
guidance only, but students are advised that significant changes may occur
when the marks are finalised. These include the possibility of a provisional
mark of 40% or more for undergraduate programmes — or 50% or more for
postgraduate programmes — changing to a failing mark.

3.

Registry will make a transcript of module marks available to students who
have successfully completed their programme. Continuing students should
discuss their marks with their Personal Development Tutors at the beginning
of the next academic year.

4.

The arrangements for publishing results in partner institutions will be as
notified to students by the Programme Leader or Programme Area Leader or
Personal Development Tutor in consultation with the Academic Registrar, but
will follow this procedure as closely as possible.

5.

Students should access their results immediately. Students have a right of
appeal against decisions taken by the Progression and Award Body that affect
their academic progress; the permitted grounds of appeal are set out in
Section 16 of this Framework (Academic Appeal Procedure).

6.

Students should also ensure that they are able to complete any resit work that
has been set during the resit period.

12.13 External Examiners
1.

In common with all Higher Education institutions in the UK, the University
appoints External Examiners.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Assessment Practices: page 21 of 23

2.

Each External Examiner considers student performance in a designated
cluster of modules associated with one or more programmes. External
Examiners help the University to ensure that justice is done to students, past
present and future, that the standard of academic awards is maintained and
that assessments are conducted in accordance with the approved regulations.

3.

External Examiners submit written annual and interim reports to the University.
A Progression and Award Board (PAB) External Examiner is responsible for
maintaining consistency of standards across programmes and award
frameworks at the same level.

4.

Details of the External Examiner arrangements applicable to a specific
programme can be obtained by contacting the Academic Standards Officer in
writing, although please also note that the University seeks to safeguard the
impartiality of the External Examiner process at all times. For this reason, it
regards any unauthorised attempt by a student to contact an External
Examiner as gross misconduct, the possible penalties for which include
expulsion.

5.

Detailed information about the role of External Examiners is contained in the
Handbook for External Examiners and Moderators.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Assessment Practices: page 22 of 23

Document Title

Plymouth Marjon University Student
Regulations Framework – Section 12
Assessment Practices

Document Reference

L:\Student Regulations Framework\Student
Regulations Framework 2025-26

Version

3.20

Issuing Authority

Senate

Custodian

Academic Standards Officer

Document Date

16th October 2009

Last Amended

16th July 2025

Sensitivity

Unclassified

Circulation

Website

Effective from

September 2025

Review Date

Ongoing

Effective until

September 2026

History

Updated annually and subject to routine ongoing
revision. Subject to minor amendment on 29/09/22
and 10/01/23.

Equality Impact Assessment

Preliminary EIA conducted for SRF, December
2010. Updated Equality Analysis Form to be
submitted.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Assessment Practices: page 23 of 23

13. SUBSTANTIAL ASSESSMENT TASKS
This section of the Student Regulations Framework applies to all taught
programmes of Plymouth Marjon University, whether undergraduate or
postgraduate, and to all apprentices enrolled on the University’s apprenticeship
programmes, who are classified as ‘students’ and referred to accordingly
throughout this Procedure.

13.1 Introduction
Substantial assessment tasks include Dissertations, Honours Projects,
Independent Study Modules and other modules of more than 30 credits, and
typically have a single assessment point. Detailed information on substantial
assessment tasks will be found in Programme and Module information
provided by the programme team.

13.2 Ethical Clearance
Students should seek ethical clearance for all assessment tasks which involve
research, or where specifically required, following the procedures used by
researchers at the University as laid down in the University’s Research Ethics
Policy and Code of Conduct. Programme teams will make students aware of
this, and support students through the process of seeking ethical clearance in
accordance with the Policy.

13.3 Dissertations and Honours Projects
1.

Dissertations and honours projects involve students working independently but
with supervision provided by an appropriate tutor, at both undergraduate and
postgraduate levels. Detailed guidance on what is required will be provided in
the Programme and / or Module information.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Substantial Assessment Tasks: page 1 of 5

2.

Dissertations and honours projects are taken in the final stage of study (Level
6 for undergraduate dissertations; Level 7 for postgraduate dissertations).
They are typically worth 40 credits or more and therefore cannot be
considered for condonement (see Section 6 of this Framework).

3.

Dissertations and honours projects must be an original piece of work and
should not exceed the word limit as published in the information provided by
the programme team or the equivalent student effort (where graphical, video,
audio or other non-written material is involved).

4.

The nature and timing of the undergraduate and postgraduate dissertations
and honours projects will be subject to approval at programme and/or
Academic Department level and will follow the University’s published
Assessments Calendar.

13.4 Dissertations and Honours Project Requirements
Students must follow the requirements specified by their programme team,
including the nature and format required for the work. All sources consulted
must be fully acknowledged throughout in accordance with the University’s
requirements. Further guidance can be found on MyMarjon.

13.5 Submission of Dissertations and Honours Projects
1. Students must follow the format for submission as detailed by their programme
team and set out in the module information. The University normally retains a
copy.
2. Please also refer to Section 4 of this Framework with regard to Extenuating
Circumstances.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Substantial Assessment Tasks: page 2 of 5

13.6 Feedback on Dissertations and Honours Projects
Feedback on the dissertation/honours project will be provided to the student in
the normal timeframes (please also refer to Section 12.3 of this Framework),
and should be available no later than the day the final results are posted.

13.7 Library Dissertation and Honours Project Holdings
1.

Selected dissertations/honours projects will be made available electronically
via the Library, typically for a period of five years. This will not affect ownership
or copyright of any original material contained within the dissertation/honours
project.

2.

Students who do not wish their dissertation/honours project to be made
available, if selected, can opt out. They can do so either by completing the
relevant section on the dissertation/honours project report form or by advising
the Library Team in writing at any time thereafter.

13.8 Undergraduate Independent Study Modules (ISMs)
1.

Undergraduate programmes may also have validated Independent Study
Modules (ISMs). An ISM is a single module (20 credits) at Level 5 or 6 that
enables students to negotiate a topic for independent study under the
supervision of a tutor. An ISM is distinct from, and cannot form part of, the
dissertation/honours project.

2.

Details of what the module involves can be found in the relevant Programme
and/or Module information. The content of ISMs must be drawn from the areas
of study within, or related to, the student’s programme of study.

3.

The Programme Leader, in liaison with the Academic Registrar, must approve
registration for an ISM and the topic. Submission dates for ISMs, will be
agreed with the student.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Substantial Assessment Tasks: page 3 of 5

4.

An Independent Study Module (ISM) should not exceed 5,000 words or the
equivalent student effort (where graphical, video, audio or other non-written
material is involved).

5.

In order to ensure that students are equipped to meet the demands of
independent study, they will not be permitted to undertake an ISM before the
second semester at Diploma Level (Level 5). Students can only take one ISM
across their entire programme of study.

6.

Please also refer to Section 4 of this Framework with regard to Extenuating
Circumstances.

13.9 Right to Copy
The University retains the right to copy any work submitted for assessment, be
it in print or electronic format, in order to carry out its processes of assessment
and for administrative purposes. Students cannot opt out of this arrangement.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Substantial Assessment Tasks: page 4 of 5

Document Title

Plymouth Marjon University Student
Regulations Framework – Section 13
Substantial Assessment Tasks

Document Reference

L:\Student Regulations Framework\Student
Regulations Framework 2025-26

Version

3.12

Issuing Authority

Senate

Custodian

Academic Standards Officer

Document Date

16th October 2009

Last Amended

16th July 2025

Sensitivity

Unclassified

Circulation

Website

Effective from

September 2025

Review Date

Ongoing

Effective until

September 2026

History

Updated annually and subject to routine ongoing
revision.

Equality Impact Assessment

Preliminary EIA conducted for SRF, December
2010. Updated Equality Analysis Form to be
submitted.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Substantial Assessment Tasks: page 5 of 5

14. ACADEMIC INTEGRITY PROCEDURE
This section of the Student Regulations Framework applies to all taught
programmes of Plymouth Marjon University, whether undergraduate or
postgraduate, to all research degree students and to all apprentices enrolled
on the University’s apprenticeship programmes, who are classified as
‘students’ and referred to accordingly throughout this Procedure.

14.1 Academic Integrity
1.

Academic Integrity relates to ethical practice in all areas of academic activity
and professional conduct. Academic Integrity is guided by adherence to
agreed principles that ensure fairness and create an atmosphere of trust and
mutual respect. It assumes a level of honesty and rigour that enables
academic activities - such as teaching, learning, assessment and publication to function for the benefit of all members of the University and the external
community.

2.

Plymouth Marjon University seeks to foster an intellectual and ethical
environment based on the principles of academic integrity. Students who
embrace academic integrity understand that there are conventions of
academic practice which both display and ensure academic integrity and that
they must:
•

properly acknowledge and cite all use of the words, results or ideas of
others.

•

properly acknowledge all those who have contributed to a piece of
work.

•

ensure that all work submitted as their own as part of an assessment or
other academic activity is produced without the aid of impermissible
materials or impermissible collaboration.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Academic Integrity Procedure: page 1 of 19

•

ensure that data and results are obtained by ethical means and
reported accurately without suppressing any results inconsistent with
their interpretation or conclusions.

•

treat all other students in an ethical manner by neither facilitating
academic dishonesty by others nor obstructing their academic
progress.

It is necessary to follow these principles in order to ensure that:
•

everyone is given credit for their ideas, words, results, and other
academic activity.

•

all student work is fairly evaluated and no student has an inappropriate
advantage over others.

•

each student’s intellectual and professional development is ensured.

•

each student is supported towards a successful transition to graduate
employment and future careers, as employers will expect graduates to
have acquired the attitudes and behaviours that academic integrity
demands.

•

the reputation of the University for integrity in its teaching and research
is maintained and enhanced.

3.

The acquisition of relevant study skills such as effective note-taking, ability to
critically evaluate other writers’ theories and concepts and presentation skills
will help students to understand these conventions.

4.

Failure to adhere to these principles leads to poor academic practice. It can
also lead to an offence of academic misconduct and, in serious cases, can
threaten the reputation of the University. Every member of the University
community therefore has a responsibility to ensure that the highest standards
of academic integrity are upheld. The sanctions that will be applied where
academic misconduct has been established, which can ultimately involve the
cancellation of credit and/or expulsion, are set out below.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Academic Integrity Procedure: page 2 of 19

14.2 Academic Misconduct – general principles
1.

The University recognises three particular areas of misconduct, as follows:
•

Personal misconduct

•

Professional misconduct

•

Academic misconduct

Academic Misconduct is defined in greater detail below. Personal and
Professional Misconduct are the subject of separate procedures (see Section
15 of this Framework). A particular case of alleged misconduct might span
more than one of these areas.
2.

The University is committed to safeguarding the standard and integrity of its
awards by the prevention and/or detection and punishment of academic
misconduct in assessed work. Accordingly, students are expected to display
academic integrity by not acting in any way which is likely to gain unfair
academic advantage in an assessment. Where a student acts in this way, an
offence of academic misconduct has been committed. Regardless of their
intentions, any student who breaches these regulations will be
considered to have committed academic misconduct. Academic
misconduct can be investigated at any time, and where it is proven after an
award is made the University reserves the right to withdraw that award.

3.

Cases of alleged academic misconduct are dealt with by way of a three-stage
process. At each stage, additional and more severe penalties become
available. The cancellation of credit becomes available at the third and final
stage. In the case of repeated misconduct, the University reserves the right to
escalate a case of misconduct to a subsequent stage.

4.

Every student is assigned to an Academic Department and is accountable to
the Academic Director of that Department. This will be the Academic
Department in which the majority of a student’s programme of study is based.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Academic Integrity Procedure: page 3 of 19

5.

All students will be invited to attend the interviews associated with these
procedures. Where attendance is not possible, then correspondence may be
used in place of the interview and the procedures may be modified to reflect
this, subject to the agreement of the Academic Standards Officer or nominee.

6.

The University determines allegations of academic misconduct on the basis of
the balance of probabilities, supported by reliable evidence, rather than the
criteria of beyond reasonable doubt which applies in criminal cases.

14.3 Definitions of Academic Misconduct
Examples of behaviour that could be construed as academic misconduct
(please note that these are not exhaustive) include:
•

Plagiarism – when a student takes and uses as their own, the thoughts,
writing, visual material or inventions of others without proper attribution (in
contravention of the guidance on referencing).

•

Self-plagiarism - this involves the submission of material already prepared
for one assessment task for another such task. A piece of work may only
be submitted for assessment once. Submitting the same piece of work
twice (or a significant part of it), will be regarded as an offence of ‘selfplagiarism’. A student who intends to quote an excerpt from material that
has already been submitted for another assessment task should seek the
advice of the Module Leader before doing so. Any such excerpt must be
appropriately referenced (see guidance on referencing).

•

Unauthorised collusion – when students join together to pass off as the
work of one (or a specified number of people) the work of more than one
(or a specified number of people). Where students are required to work in
groups as part of an assessment, module tutors are expected to make it
absolutely explicit in their instructions whether the students should produce
common or individual work and the extent of permissible collaboration.
Taking a copy of another student’s work without their permission also

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Academic Integrity Procedure: page 4 of 19

amounts to unauthorised collusion, although sanctions will only apply in
such cases to the student who copied the work.
•

Cheating – when a student brings books, notes or other material or
equipment of value in answering examination questions, or any means of
accessing information of value, into an examination which has not been
explicitly authorised: fails to comply with the instructions given concerning
conduct in examinations: or obtains an examination paper in advance of its
authorised release. Similarly, any student who is authorised to leave an
examination temporarily is not permitted to consult any source regarding
the content of their examination whilst absent.

•

Unauthorised Content Generation (UCG) – when a student submits work
that has been produced in whole or part by another person and/or
organisation on their behalf, including any such work that has been
produced with the inappropriate use of artificial intelligence (AI). This may
include the purchase of an assessment from an organisation or an
individual or an unpaid contribution from a partner, friend or family
member, as well as the use of software, services and assistance in
assessments which have been specifically prohibited in the assessment
specifications. A student who makes available work to another student (of
the University or elsewhere) also commits this offence, whether in
exchange for financial gain or otherwise.

•

Fabrication – when a student makes up data or other such content,
manipulates content and/or tampers with documentation to gain an unfair
academic advantage. Fabrication also occurs when a student falsely
claims to have conducted experiments, observations, interviews or any
form of research which they have not carried out.

•

Impersonation – when a student enters into an arrangement with another
person who fraudulently represents them at an examination or test. Please
note that where an offence of impersonation takes place, both the
impersonator (if a student of the University) and the student impersonated
will be the subject of misconduct procedures.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Academic Integrity Procedure: page 5 of 19

•

Unethical conduct – when a student fails to gain ethical approval where
appropriate, coerces or bribes project participants and/or breaches
confidentiality with regard to information on individuals gathered during
data collection, or otherwise breaches ethical codes of practice that are
applicable to the student’s programme of study.

14.4 Allegations of Academic Misconduct
1.

Alleged academic misconduct should always be investigated within the
Academic Department in which the majority of a student’s programme of study
resides. Where it involves a module located outside that Academic
Department, appropriate subject-specialist advice should be sought where
necessary although, normally, the decision as to whether or not an offence of
academic misconduct has been committed can be taken independently of
subject knowledge.

2.

Staff should refer all cases of alleged misconduct for investigation to the
appropriate responsible officer, which will be the Programme
Leader/Programme Area Leader. Where a student’s programme of study
crosses two Academic Departments, this will be the Programme
Leader/Programme Area Leader in which the majority of a student’s
programme of study resides.

14.5 Academic Misconduct – Stage One Procedures
Academic Misconduct not relating to the inappropriate use of
artificial intelligence (AI)
1.

Where assessment is undertaken at Level 5 or above, i.e. at a higher level
than Year One of an honours degree, a foundation degree, or a Certificate of
Higher Education (see Section 1.4 of this Framework), the Programme
Leader/Programme Area Leader must always refer a case of academic
misconduct to Stage Two (see Section 14.6 of this Framework).

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Academic Integrity Procedure: page 6 of 19

2.

Where assessment is undertaken at Level 4, i.e. in Year One of an honours
degree, a foundation degree, or a Certificate of Higher Education (see Section
1.4 of this Framework), and poor scholarship is identified as the most likely
cause of academic misconduct, the Programme Leader/Programme Area
Leader will permit the assignment to be resubmitted for an uncapped mark.
This will follow an advisory meeting between the Programme
Leader/Programme Area Leader and the student.
The above will not apply to the resit period. If academic misconduct is proven
during the resit period, the assessment will be marked as failed. No further
resit opportunity will be granted in line with Section 6 of this Framework.

3.

The Programme Leader/Programme Area Leader will communicate their
decision to the student in writing, and the reason(s) for it, normally within five
working days of the advisory meeting, copying to the Academic Standards
Officer. As an assignment can be resubmitted for an uncapped mark at Stage
One, there is no right of appeal at this stage.

Academic Misconduct relating to the inappropriate use of artificial
intelligence (AI)
4.

For first-time instances of inappropriate use of AI, Stage One procedures will
normally apply. The default sanction in such cases — regardless of level of
study — is resubmission of the assignment free of academic misconduct, for
an uncapped mark, following an advisory meeting with the Programme
Leader/Programme Area Leader. Any subsequent instances of AI-related
academic misconduct must be referred to Stage Two.
However, where the Programme Leader/Programme Area Leader determines
that a case involves substantial misuse of AI — constituting significant
academic misconduct — they may, by exception, refer the matter directly to
Stage Two, even if it is a first offence. This is particularly appropriate where
the standard Stage One sanction (resubmission for an uncapped mark) is
deemed insufficient.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Academic Integrity Procedure: page 7 of 19

5.

If the student has failed the assessment, the failure would automatically rule
out the appropriateness of the Stage One sanction (i.e. resubmission for an
uncapped mark); therefore, in this instance, the case should be considered
under Stage Two of these procedures.

6.

If a student is found to have used AI inappropriately during the resit period,
the assessment will be marked as failed, regardless of whether it is a first
offence. No further resit opportunity will be granted in line with Section 6 of this
Framework.

7.

The Programme Leader/Programme Area Leader will communicate their
decision to the student in writing, and the reason(s) for it, normally within five
working days of the advisory meeting, copying to the Academic Standards
Officer. Where a student has been permitted to resubmit an assignment for an
uncapped mark at Stage One, there is no right of appeal.

14.6 Academic Misconduct – Stage Two Procedures
1.

In all cases where academic misconduct is suspected on assessment
undertaken at Level 5 or above, and in cases where academic misconduct is
suspected on assessment undertaken at Level 4 and the procedures set out in
Section 14.5 of this Framework are considered insufficient (i.e. a further
instance of inappropriate use of artificial intelligence, or substantial academic
misconduct), the Programme Leader/Programme Area Leader will forward the
relevant Turnitin Similarity Report to the Dean of Faculty or Associate Dean
where appropriate. Where it is suspected in an examination, the principal
invigilator will prepare the report in association with at least one other
invigilator or member of staff. The Programme Leader/Programme Area
Leader should then endorse the report and pass it to the Dean of Faculty or
Associate Dean where appropriate.

2.

In cases where, in the opinion of the Dean or Associate Dean of Faculty, the
potential severity of an offence of academic misconduct identified at Stage
Two would justify suspension from the University, the cancellation of credit

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Academic Integrity Procedure: page 8 of 19

(covering one or more modules affected by the academic misconduct) or
expulsion, they shall refer the matter direct to Stage Three without interview
(on the prior advice of the Academic Standards Officer if appropriate),
providing a written rationale in the context of their incident report. Otherwise,
they shall call the student to a Stage Two interview, which will allow the
student an opportunity to provide additional information.
3.

If the standard of assessed work is completely out of line with that of previous
work and/or written in a style that raises credibility issues, thus raising the
possibility that contract cheating or ‘ghosting’ has occurred, the evidence
presented to the Dean or Associate Dean of Faculty should consist of copies
of other work submitted during the academic year in conjunction with the
suspect piece/s of work.

4.

The Dean or Associate Dean of Faculty will normally undertake the Stage Two
procedures, but may also nominate the Dean or Associate Dean of another
Faculty or Academic Director to undertake this task. The student should be
informed of the date, time and place of the interview in writing at least five
working days before the hearing and be provided with the evidence at that
point along with a copy of these Procedures. Where this deadline is not met,
the hearing will only proceed, at the stated date and time, with the student’s
consent. Should the student not respond to the request for an interview or fail
to attend the interview without good reason, the Dean or Associate Dean of
Faculty should proceed in their absence. Such an interview can be scheduled
at any time in the calendar year, but reasonable steps will be taken to
schedule it at a point in the year when the student would normally be present
in the University.

5.

The interview will proceed in the presence of at least one other member of the
Faculty, normally the member of the Academic Department who identified the
suspected academic misconduct, as well as any other witnesses as
appropriate. A member of the Registry and Programme Support Office will
normally be in attendance. The student may be accompanied by a ‘friend’,
who is permitted to attend to provide advice and support to the student, and
can be heard only with the agreement of both the student and the Chair. The

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Academic Integrity Procedure: page 9 of 19

name and status of any such ‘friend’ must normally be notified to the
University no less than five working days in advance of the hearing. The
University must grant its consent beforehand for the ‘friend’ to attend the
meeting.
6.

Following interview, and if upholding the allegation/s, the Dean or Associate
Dean may impose one of the following penalties:
•

re-submission of work free of academic misconduct to be assessed for a
capped mark of 40% (or 50% for postgraduate work) for the assessment.

•

re-submission of work, free of academic misconduct, to be assessed for a
capped mark of 0% in the relevant assessment element or, in more serious
cases, for the module as a whole; credits will be awarded if a passing
standard of 40% (or 50% for postgraduate work) has been reached in the
module overall.

The above penalties will not apply to the resit period. If academic
misconduct is proven during the resit period, the assessment will be marked
as failed. No further resit opportunity will be granted in line with Section 6 of
this Framework.
7.

The Dean or Associate Dean of Faculty may also refer the matter to Stage
Three if, on the basis of the information gained at interview, they now consider
that the potential severity of an offence of academic misconduct identified at
Stage Two would justify suspension from the University, the cancellation of
credit (covering one or more modules affected by gross academic misconduct)
or expulsion.

8.

The resultant decision letter, which should normally be sent within five working
days of the interview, should clarify the decision and the reason(s) for it. The
letter should be copied to appropriate members of staff, including the
Academic Standards Officer so that a central record can be maintained.

9.

All proven cases of academic misconduct at Stage Two shall be considered as
failure of the module, normally requiring resubmission of the work to be
undertaken at the normal time for resit work.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Academic Integrity Procedure: page 10 of 19

14.7 Academic Misconduct – Stage Three procedures
1.

In cases where the severity of an offence of academic misconduct identified at
Stage Two is potentially such as to justify suspension from the University, the
cancellation of credit (covering one or more modules affected by gross
academic misconduct) or expulsion, the Dean of Faculty or nominee will
provide a written rationale for recommending a formal hearing at Stage Three
of the Procedures to the Academic Registrar.

2.

In all cases the rationale must state the name(s) of the student(s) against
whom the allegation/s is/are made and the nature of the alleged academic
misconduct, with a brief description of it and all available evidence. It should
also include the names of any witnesses who can support the allegation/s and
the name and role of the person signing the report.

3.

The Academic Registrar will instruct the Academic Standards Officer or
nominee to convene an Academic Misconduct Panel. This Panel shall
comprise:
•

An appropriately qualified and experienced senior member of academic
staff, from the roster of Student Casework practitioners approved by the
Academic Registrar, who has no involvement with the student (Chair)

•

An appropriately qualified and experienced senior member of academic
staff, from the roster of Student Casework practitioners approved by the
Academic Registrar, who has had no involvement with the student

•

A member of the Executive Committee of the Student Union, normally the
President or Deputy President, who also has no involvement with the
student

The Academic Standards Officer or nominee will act as Secretary to the Panel
and proceedings may also be recorded, either electronically or by a minute
taker, by mutual agreement. The Panel will not meet unless all members and
the Secretary are present. The Academic Standards Officer or nominee will

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Academic Integrity Procedure: page 11 of 19

endeavour to ensure that the Panel includes at least one male and one female
member.
4.

Before a Panel meeting is convened, the Chair will review the available
evidence and request any additional evidence that they consider to be
appropriate via the Academic Standards Officer or nominee. This will also be
circulated to all parties involved within the applicable timeframes.

5.

The student shall be informed of the date of the meeting of the Panel not less
than ten working days in advance. This deadline can only be reduced with the
student’s written consent. They will be invited to appear in person but, in
exceptional circumstances, the Panel may also hear a case, at the discretion
of the Chair advised by the Academic Standards Officer, in their absence. A
Panel can be scheduled at any time in the calendar year; however, reasonable
steps will be taken to schedule this at a point in the year when the student
would normally be present in the University.

6.

The student may be accompanied by a ‘friend’, who is permitted to attend to
provide advice and support to the student and can be heard only with the
agreement of both the student and the Chair. The name and status of any
such ‘friend’ must normally be notified to the Academic Standards Officer or
nominee no less than five working days in advance of the hearing. The
University must grant its consent beforehand for the ‘friend’ to attend the
meeting. The student may also choose to call witnesses in his or her defence,
including employees of the University where appropriate.

7.

The Academic Standards Officer or nominee shall normally circulate the list of
witnesses to be called, and all relevant documentation, to all parties not less
than five working days before the meeting. Where this is not possible, the
Academic Standards Office or nominee will advise the student who will have
the right to request a postponement. Additional papers supplied by or on
behalf of the student will be circulated thereafter with the proviso that, in
exceptional circumstances, the Panel may decide to adjourn a hearing in order
to secure a written response.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Academic Integrity Procedure: page 12 of 19

8.

The refusal or failure of a student to attend will not invalidate the Panel’s
proceedings, provided that they have been given sufficient notice as set out
above.

9.

At the outset of the hearing the Chair of the Panel shall identify the issues to
be determined, the persons entitled to attend the hearing, and the documents
supplied to the Panel. They will also ask the student to confirm that they have
understood the procedures and have no concerns with regard to procedure.

10.

The author of the incident report, or a nominee, will then outline the case
against the student, before the Chair invites witnesses to give evidence.
Members of the Panel may question witnesses directly and the student, or
their ‘friend’ at the student’s request, may question the author of the incident
report (or nominee) and the witnesses through the Chair.

11.

The Chair shall then invite the student to respond. The Chair and other
members of the Panel may question the student on the statement and/or the
documentary evidence. Witnesses may question the student through the
Chair.

12.

At the conclusion, the Chair shall offer the student the opportunity of making a
closing statement (which should not introduce new evidence), once the
witnesses have left, before the Panel considers its decision in private. In all
cases, the student shall have a right to make a final statement to the Panel
before it considers its decision. This can be made by the student’s ‘friend’ at
the student’s request.

13.

In addition to the penalties available at Stages One and Two, the Panel may
impose any or all of the following penalties:
•

suspension from the University, for a maximum period of one academic
session

•

the cancellation of credit (covering one or more modules) with or without
the possibility to retake the modules for a capped or uncapped module
mark as determined by the Panel

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Academic Integrity Procedure: page 13 of 19

•
14.

expulsion from the University (actual or suspended)

The resultant Stage Three decision letter will be drafted by the Academic
Standards Officer or nominee for the approval of the Chair. It shall also
constitute the official record of the hearing including, where this is applicable,
the reasons for imposing a specific penalty or penalties and an explanation as
to why a lesser penalty was unsuitable.

15.

The letter will normally be sent to the student within ten working days of the
hearing and within forty working days of the commencement of the Academic
Integrity Procedure. If this is not possible, exceptionally, the student will be
kept informed. Where a decision has been taken to suspend or expel a
student, it will take immediate effect.

16.

The University may inform the Independent Safeguarding Agency or any other
Professional, Statutory or Regulatory Body of the outcome of any Stage 3
misconduct proceedings, where applicable. If it intends to do so, it will include
notification of that decision within the decision letter.

14.8 Right of Appeal
1.

At Stages Two and Three of the process, a student has the right of appeal
against the decision and/or the penalty imposed on any or all of the following
grounds:
•

That the procedures were not followed properly

•

That the decision maker(s) reached an unreasonable decision

•

That the student has new material evidence that they were unable, for valid
reasons, to provide earlier in the process

•

That there is bias or reasonable perception of bias during the procedure

•

That the penalty imposed was disproportionate, or not permitted under the
procedures

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Academic Integrity Procedure: page 14 of 19

Any such appeal must be submitted in writing to the Academic Standards
Officer or nominee, within ten working days of the date of the letter
communicating the decision.
2.

The Academic Standards Officer or nominee will refer the appeal to an
appropriately qualified and experienced senior member of academic staff,
from the roster of Student Casework practitioners approved by the Academic
Registrar, who has had no involvement with the student for consideration. The
appeal stage will normally be concluded within fifteen working days of the
receipt of the appeal. If a delay is envisaged, the appellant will be notified in
writing before the end of the fifteen working day period.

3.

If valid grounds to proceed with the appeal are not found, the University’s
Academic Integrity Procedure will have been exhausted, and the Academic
Standards Officer or nominee will advise the student accordingly.

4.

If, however, it is found that there may be additional evidence that could not
reasonably have been provided to the original hearing, or procedural
irregularities, the Academic Standards Officer or nominee will reconvene the
original decision-making body with new membership of a similar status. This
will always lead to an additional interview or hearing, under the procedures
appropriate to the relevant Stage, which will not involve the participation of
anyone involved in the original decision. In all such cases, the appeal process
may lead to the confirmation, reduction or quashing of the penalty originally
imposed, but not to an increased penalty. This re-hearing will be final and
there will be no further right of appeal thereafter.

5.

The student will be notified in writing of the decision, normally within five
working days of the hearing, in accordance with the procedures appropriate at
the relevant stage. The decision letter will confirm that the University’s
Academic Integrity Procedure has been exhausted.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Academic Integrity Procedure: page 15 of 19

14.9 Office of the Independent Adjudicator for Higher Education
1.

If a student remains dissatisfied after the appropriate internal processes have
been exhausted, they can ask the Office of the Independent Adjudicator for
Higher Education (OIA) to review their case. For full details please contact
http://www.oiahe.org.uk.

2.

The University must issue a Completion of Procedures letter in order for the
OIA to review a case of academic misconduct. A Completion of Procedures
letter will be issued automatically where valid grounds for re-hearing the case
are not found at the review stage and otherwise on request. However, where a
Completion of Procedures letter is issued before the review stage has been
conducted, the letter will make it clear that the student has not completed the
University’s internal processes. All requests for review must be made to the
OIA within twelve months of the date of issue of a Completion of Procedures
letter.

14.10 Annual Report
Each year, the Academic Standards Officer or nominee submits a report on
student casework to Senate, detailing (anonymously) general matters or
issues arising from recent academic misconduct cases. Additional reports are
also submitted to the Finance and Resources Committee of the Board of
Governors on a regular basis. Senate will forward recommendations to other
relevant University committees so that broad concerns can be shared, and
appropriate action taken.

14.11 Procedures at Partner Organisations
1.

In accordance with the expectations set out in the UK Quality Code For Higher
Education and the University’s Collaborative Provision Regulations and
Procedures, all students registered for the University’s awards have the

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Academic Integrity Procedure: page 16 of 19

ultimate right to complain to the University, irrespective of where they are
studying. This right of complaint, however, is not absolute and is subject to the
precise wording of the partnership agreement.
2.

The partner organisation, accordingly, should ensure that clear information
and guidance with regard to academic misconduct is made available to all
students registered for the University’s awards. This should include clear
information about the sequence of processes involved and make clear the
channels through which dissatisfied students can contact the University
directly.

3.

Once the internal procedures of the partner organisation have been fully
exhausted, students who wish to take their case to the University for review
should ask the Academic Standards Officer in writing if they are eligible to do
so. Students may request a review of the decision on the following grounds
only:
•

That the procedures were not followed properly

•

That the decision maker(s) reached an unreasonable decision

•

That the student has new material evidence that they were unable, for valid
reasons, to provide earlier in the process

•

That there is bias or reasonable perception of bias during the procedure

•

That the penalty imposed was disproportionate, or not permitted under the
procedures

4.

If a case is eligible for review, the Academic Standards Officer will refer the
challenge to an appropriately qualified and experienced senior member of
academic staff, from the roster of Student Casework practitioners approved by
the Academic Registrar, who has no involvement with the partnership. If the
challenge is upheld, the case will be referred back to the partner organisation
to be reheard under its own procedures. Otherwise, the University will not refer
the case back to the partner organisation to be reheard and the Academic
Standards Officer will advise the student accordingly. This will include advice

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Academic Integrity Procedure: page 17 of 19

with regard to a student’s further right of appeal to the Office of the
Independent Adjudicator (OIA).

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Academic Integrity Procedure: page 18 of 19

Document Title

Plymouth Marjon University Student
Regulations Framework – Section 14 Academic
Integrity Procedure

Document Reference

L:\Student Regulations Framework\Student
Regulations Framework 2025-26

Version

1.15

Issuing Authority

Senate

Custodian

Academic Standards Officer

Document Date

15th September 2016

Last Amended

16th July 2025

Sensitivity

Unclassified

Circulation

Website

Effective from

September 2025

Review Date

Ongoing

Effective until

September 2026

History

Updated annually and subject to routine ongoing
revision, informed by the Good Practice
Framework.

Equality Impact Assessment

Preliminary EIA conducted for SRF, December
2010. Updated Equality Analysis Form to be
submitted.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Academic Integrity Procedure: page 19 of 19

15. STUDENT MISCONDUCT PROCEDURE
This section of the Student Regulations Framework applies to all taught
programmes of Plymouth Marjon University, whether undergraduate or
postgraduate, to all research degree students and to all apprentices enrolled
on the University’s degree apprenticeship programmes, who are classified as
‘students’ and referred to accordingly throughout this Procedure.

15.1 Introduction and Scope
1.

Plymouth Marjon University is committed to upholding the highest standards of
behaviour in an atmosphere conducive to learning, and in accordance with its
Values. Students are expected to conduct themselves in ways which ensure
that this is the case. These procedures provide a mechanism for dealing with
conduct which falls short of what is acceptable (hereafter referred to as
‘misconduct’) and harms the good order and discipline of the University in so
doing. They operate in the context of the University’s general and specific
rules, regulations, policies and strategies.

2.

Please note that the University’s interest in misconduct is not limited to the
time spent on its premises and that, therefore, students are deemed to be
members of the University at all times and in all media, including social media.

3.

The University recognises three particular areas of misconduct, as follows:
•

General misconduct

•

Programme-specific misconduct

•

Academic misconduct

The Student Misconduct Procedure covers general and programme-specific
misconduct. Academic misconduct is covered in the University’s Academic
Integrity Procedure, which constitutes Section 14 of this Framework. A
particular case of alleged misconduct might span more than one of these
areas.
Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Student Misconduct Procedure: page 1 of 31

4.

Where there is an allegation of misconduct, the University will firstly check
whether another process or procedure should be initiated alongside or instead
of the Student Misconduct Procedure, such as the Support to Continue to
Study Procedure (Section 9 of this Framework) or the Fitness to Practise
Procedure (Section 10 of this Framework).

5.

Cases of alleged general and programme-specific misconduct are dealt with
by way of a three-stage process. The first stage focusses on supporting
students to address their behaviour, although it also includes a range of
penalties. The second stage introduces additional penalties. The most serious
penalties of suspension and expulsion become available at the third and final
stage, and expulsion is the default penalty at that stage. In the case of
repeated misconduct, the University reserves the right to escalate a case of
misconduct to a subsequent stage. Cases of misconduct may not always
proceed through all three stages - in serious cases the University reserves the
right to begin misconduct proceedings at the second or third stage. The
decision regarding the stage at which the misconduct proceedings will begin
resides with the Head of Student Wellbeing and Support.

6.

Allegations of misconduct are determined by the University on the basis of ‘the
balance of probabilities’, rather than the criteria of ‘beyond reasonable doubt’
which applies in criminal cases. ‘The balance of probabilities’ asks if it is more
likely than not that the misconduct occurred.

7.

These Procedures only apply to students, and separate Procedures apply to
members of staff. Any student seeking to make an allegation of inappropriate
conduct against an employee of the University should pursue the allegation
initially with the Executive Director of People and Culture (see Section 17.2.5
of this Framework).

8.

The University recognises that involvement in misconduct proceedings, either
as a reporting/reported student or as a witness, can be stressful and
potentially traumatic. Every effort has been made to reduce the level of stress
associated with these procedures. Students (reporting/reported/witnesses) are
encouraged to make use of support throughout their involvement with these

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Student Misconduct Procedure: page 2 of 31

procedures and should feel able to raise queries at any point, whether that is
through the University’s Student Wellbeing and Support team, the Student
Union, or other sources. Procedural queries can be directed to the Academic
Standards Officer.
9.

The University will aim to ensure that penalties are applied consistently, for
example by holding an anonymised summary log of Stage 2 and 3
proceedings to act as a source of future reference for panel members.

10.

The University can make reasonable adjustments to the procedures on a
case-by-case basis, as appropriate, to take account of the individual needs of
students. Reasonable adjustments shall be made to the procedures to ensure
fairness for students with a disability. Reporting students, reported students
and witnesses should make any reasonable adjustments known to the
University so that these can be implemented. A record will be kept of any
adjustments made.

11.

This procedure can be read in conjunction with the Summary of Misconduct
Proceedings flowchart which can be provided on request.

12.

This procedure is applicable to all students throughout their period of
enrolment with the University, whatever their registration status, and includes
students whose enrolment is interrupted or suspended.

13.

In cases which might lead to a more serious sanction being imposed, if a
student withdraws from or leaves the University part way through misconduct
proceedings, or where an allegation of misconduct is made after a student has
left, the University reserves the right to continue proceedings, to hear the
process in full and reach a conclusion. If the former student is found to have
had a case to answer (i.e. it was determined that misconduct occurred on
‘balance of probabilities’), this will be noted on their student record and the
outcome would be taken into account if the individual wished to gain re-entry
to the University in future, considering the possible risk to the good order and
discipline of the University. This caveat will not apply to allegations of student
misconduct that can be dealt with at Stage One under Section 15.7 of this
Framework.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Student Misconduct Procedure: page 3 of 31

Confidentiality and Disclosure
14.

Information about students who are subject to misconduct proceedings will be
kept confidential as far as possible. The information will only be disclosed to
those involved in investigating or deciding the matter, and those involved in
actioning any of the outcomes, where applicable. The University handles
reference requests from employers based on their professional standards. If a
reference request comes from a health or education provider, recent or
ongoing disciplinary actions, or referrals to the Disclosure and Barring Service
(DBS), may be disclosed to the employer if requested. Disciplinary action does
not refer to an allegation being made against a student, or to misconduct
proceedings being opened (as this is not disciplinary action), but to the student
being found to have had a case to answer under this procedure, i.e. it was
determined that the misconduct occurred on the ‘balance of probabilities’.
Information provided should be relevant, limited, factual, and justifiable in all
cases.

15.

It will not normally be appropriate to keep the identity of witnesses secret
during misconduct proceedings, as doing so might undermine the reported
student’s ability to defend themselves. If a witness does not agree to the
reported student knowing their identity, then the University might deem it
inappropriate to rely on their evidence.

Cases involving more than one student
16.

Where more than one student is involved in a case of suspected misconduct,
the University will determine, based on the particular circumstances, and at
the discretion of the Academic Registrar, whether the cases should be
investigated and/or heard separately or as a group.

17.

Where cases are investigated and/or heard as a group, a decision will be
made for each student individually, taking their particular circumstances into
account. However, there should be broad consistency in any sanction/s given
to all students who commit the same offence with similar circumstances.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Student Misconduct Procedure: page 4 of 31

18.

Where cases are investigated and/or heard as a group, decision-makers can
cross-reference evidence or statements from or against one reported student
facing the allegations with those from or against the other reported student/s.

15.2 Examples of Misconduct
1.

Examples of unacceptable behaviour which involve a potential offence of
general misconduct include:
•

Physical aggression (whether or not this results in physical injury).

•

Verbal aggression (to include all forms of communication including face-toface and telephone conversations, letters, e-mails, social media and all
other forms of electronic media). Please see the University’s Social Media
Policy for further guidance.

•

Threatening behaviour.

•

Harassment (conduct towards others which is perceived as a negative act
and which is unwanted, offensive, worrying, stressful or intimidating to the
recipient. See Section 15.5 of this Framework for a fuller definition).

•

Anti-social, disruptive and/or offensive behaviour (including drunken
behaviour and/or excessive noise), even where there is no evidence of
any deliberate intention to cause harassment or inconvenience.

•

Theft or deception, including the use of forged, falsified or fraudulent
documentation to gain an advantage.

•

Involvement with illegal drugs, including new psychoactive substances or
so-called ‘legal highs’, either as a consumer and/or supplier.

•

Bringing the University or its staff or students into disrepute with partner
organisations and/or the wider community or via social media. Please see
the University’s Social Media Policy for further guidance.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Student Misconduct Procedure: page 5 of 31

•

Harming or attempting to harm the good order and discipline of the
University, including the deliberate obstruction of and/or non-cooperation
with University procedures.

•

Compromising the safety of and/or wellbeing of staff, other students, or
visitors.

•

Failure to maintain effective relationships and to deal efficiently and
politely with peers, University staff, University support services, and/or
external stakeholders.

•

Damage to University property or the property of others.

•

Misuse of computing or University network facilities.

•

Misuse of the University’s fire-fighting or other safety equipment.

•

Unauthorised recording of any University-related activity, event or
meeting.

•

A persistent refusal to pay a fine.

•

Infringements of a Tenancy Agreement to reside on the campus not
covered by the above.

2.

Examples of behaviour that could be construed as programme-specific
misconduct, in addition to the examples given above, are as follows:
•

Behaviour that would bring the programme or associated profession (if
applicable) into disrepute.

•

Inappropriate behaviour towards staff and/or students in a programmespecific context (including, but not confined to, the examples set out in
Section 15.2.2 of this Framework).

•

Inappropriate behaviour on placement or in work-based learning activities
including:
o abuse (physical, sexual or emotional)

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Student Misconduct Procedure: page 6 of 31

o any action or omission on placement that may place a client’s / pupil’s
safety at risk

o aggressive or threatening behaviour
o alcohol or drug abuse
o breach of confidentiality (except under the provisions of the Public
Interest Disclosure Act 1998)
o behaviour that indicates a lack of honesty and trustworthiness, e.g.

misrepresentation of qualifications at the time of admission, forging of
documents or signatures

o acceptance of gifts, hospitality and other considerations, apart from
small tokens of appreciation, or allowing any gift to influence the quality
of care provided to the donor or to others
o malicious or wilful damage to practice placement premises
o unjustified refusal to carry out a reasonable and lawful instruction
o failure to respect clients as individuals and/or failure to protect the

interests and dignity of clients irrespective of gender, age, race, ability,
sexuality, economic status, lifestyle, culture, religion or of any other
irrelevant distinction

o forming an inappropriate relationship with a client or acting in an
inappropriate way with or towards a client
o failure to disclose at the earliest opportunity that a member of staff
responsible for their supervision, teaching, training or assessment has a
likely conflict of interest on account of their relationship with them (e.g.
being family members, family friends, romantic or sexual partners), if
not previously disclosed by a member of University or placement staff.
•

Malicious or wilful misuse of social media in a programme-specific context
(please see the University’s Social Media Policy for further guidance).

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Student Misconduct Procedure: page 7 of 31

•

Unauthorised contact with an External Examiner or external professionals
involved with a student’s programme of study.

•

Disruption of an examination or other formal assessment.

•

Unauthorised recording of any programme-specific activity, event or
meeting.

3.

Please note that these are not exhaustive. Moreover, specific instances of
misconduct might combine two or more of these examples.

4.

Issues of professional unsuitability, where these do not involve allegations of
misconduct, are dealt with by way of separate Fitness to Practice procedures
(see Section 10 of this Framework).

15.3 Reporting Misconduct
1.

Reports of alleged student misconduct can be made to Student Wellbeing and
Support (SWS) by email or in person at the SWS office. Reports should be
directed to the Head of Wellbeing and Support (or nominee). Where a
potential offence of misconduct is reported by a visitor to the University, a
member of staff or a student will need to instigate the procedures on their
behalf.

2.

Students and staff will be supported to discuss their concerns and given
appropriate advice and guidance about their options, which might include
making a formal report under the misconduct procedures, reporting the matter
to the police where they are reporting behaviour that may amount to a criminal
offence, or taking no further action. The University recognises that reporting
misconduct can be challenging, and a student may have significant concerns
about making an allegation, whether informally or formally, particularly if it
concerns those with whom they have a personal relationship. Discussions will
be confidential, there is no obligation for a student or member of staff to make
a formal report under misconduct procedures, and reporting parties will be
offered support whatever action they choose to take.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Student Misconduct Procedure: page 8 of 31

3.

Normally, where the recipient of the alleged misconduct indicates that they do
not wish to report a matter to the police, the University will follow that decision.
However, the University reserves the right to report an incident(s) to the police
where it deems that the safety of students or staff may be at risk. The
University will consider any potential harm that unauthorised disclosure to the
police may have on the individual, and any such decision should be explained
to the recipient of the alleged misconduct.

15.4 Interim Measures
1.

In exceptional circumstances, such as where a student is the subject of an
allegation of serious misconduct, or has been charged with or accused of a
criminal offence, a student may be denied access to the University, both
physically and virtually, with immediate effect at the point of referral. This will
take account of students’ rights under the legislation protecting tenants and
licensees and suitable alternative accommodation will be provided if the denial
of access is likely to lead to hardship. This will be an interim arrangement,
pending the outcome of the student misconduct procedure and any
subsequent penalties which are imposed.

2.

This power will only be exercised, however if the Vice-Chancellor (or, in the
Vice-Chancellor’s absence, the Deputy Vice-Chancellor and Provost) decides,
on the joint recommendation of the Head of Student Wellbeing and Support
(or nominee) and Academic Registrar, that the student’s access to the
University would jeopardise the physical and/or mental well-being of any
members of staff or of the student body, or otherwise harm the good order and
discipline of the University.

3.

Denial of access will be subject to regular review (normally at monthly
intervals) and a student can challenge the denial of access by sending a
written submission to the Vice-Chancellor (or nominee). The challenge will be
referred for review to a member of the Executive Leadership Team who has
had no involvement with the student or the case. The decision of this senior
colleague will be final and there will be no further right of appeal.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Student Misconduct Procedure: page 9 of 31

4.

If a risk to client / pupil care is perceived at any point in these Procedures the
Dean of Faculty, on the joint recommendation of the Head of Student
Wellbeing and Support (or nominee) and Academic Registrar, may authorise
the removal of a student from a current or prospective placement or workbased learning activity until this risk is no longer perceived to apply. Any such
decision should be notified to Registry Services in writing, via the Academic
Registrar. Due attention should also be paid to University Safeguarding
Policies in cases where risk to client/pupil care is perceived.

5.

Under the terms of the Disclosure and Barring Service (DBS), and where the
student may have harmed a child or vulnerable adult, or put a child or
vulnerable adult at risk of harm, there is a legal requirement to refer the
student to the DBS. This action will be taken by Registry Services on behalf of
the Academic Registrar.

6.

Students charged with a criminal offence may also be subject to the Student
Misconduct Procedure with regard to the same offence. Proceedings will be
opened but suspended until such time as the criminal case has been resolved.
The University should keep in touch with the student involved and the police
during this process. This does not affect the capacity of the University to deny
access to a student, or remove them from placement, as above. Any such
decision should be notified to Registry Services in writing.

7.

The University reserves the right to invoke these Procedures, irrespective of
any related criminal case. This is because it determines allegations of
misconduct on the basis of ‘the balance of probabilities’, supported by reliable
evidence, rather than the criteria of ‘beyond reasonable doubt’ which applies
in criminal cases.

8.

Interim Measures may also be put in place informally at the discretion of the
Head of Student Wellbeing and Support (or nominee). This may be for the
purpose of supporting the wellbeing of students involved in Misconduct
Proceedings, ensuring confidentiality while proceedings are ongoing, or
preventing emotionally charged situations from escalating further. Measures
may include:

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Student Misconduct Procedure: page 10 of 31

•

Moving a student into Emergency Accommodation.

•

Requesting that students are not required to work directly with each other
where permissible.

•

Temporarily moving a student to another teaching group where permissible.

•

Temporarily prohibiting named students from contacting each other, either
directly, indirectly, via social media or through a third party.

•

Making arrangements for students to access University facilities at different
times.

15.5 Harassment and Discrimination
1.

The University defines harassment and discrimination, in the context of these
procedures, as conduct or behaviour which is unwanted by the recipient and is
offensive, intimidating or hostile; which interferes with the recipient’s study
performance; and/or induces stress, anxiety, fear or sickness in the recipient.
What is perceived as harassment by one person may not seem so to another.
However, if conduct is perceived as a negative act and is unwanted, offensive,
worrying, stressful, and/or intimidating to the recipient then these procedures
may be invoked.

2.

The University will not tolerate harassment under any circumstances or
however motivated. All members of the University community have a
responsibility, therefore, to ensure that they do not perpetrate, incite,
encourage or condone any form of harassment within the University.

3.

Individuals may fear victimisation if they complain of harassment. It should be
remembered that victimisation of the complainant is itself unlawful even if it is
subsequently found that no harassment occurred.

4.

The Equality Act 2010 prohibits three types of harassment that the University
uses to guide its understanding. These are:

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Student Misconduct Procedure: page 11 of 31

•

Harassment related to a ‘relevant protected characteristic’ (including sex
or gender reassignment)

•

Sexual harassment

•

Less favourable treatment of a student because they submit to or reject
sexual harassment.

The University’s Student Sexual Harassment and Misconduct Policy can be
accessed here.
The following is broadly taken from the Equality and Human Rights
Commission (EHRC) on the meaning and understanding of harassment
derived from the Equality Act 2010 Guidance.

Harassment related to a ‘relevant protected characteristic’
5.

Following advice in the Equality Act 2010, the University includes the following
as ‘relevant protected characteristics’:•

Age

•

Disability

•

Gender Reassignment

•

Race

•

Religion or Belief

•

Sex

•

Sexual Orientation

Pregnancy and maternity are not protected directly under the harassment
provisions. However, harassment related to pregnancy and maternity would
amount to harassment related to sex.
6.

Harassment, which is related to a protected characteristic will be, for this
procedure, as stated in section 15.5.1.

7.

Unwanted conduct covers a very wide range of behaviour, including spoken or
written words or abuse, imagery, graffiti, physical gestures, facial expressions,

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Student Misconduct Procedure: page 12 of 31

mimicry, jokes, pranks, acts affecting a student’s surroundings or other
physical behaviour.
8.

The word unwanted means essentially the same as ‘unwelcome’ or ‘uninvited’.
‘Unwanted’ does not mean that express objection must be made to the
conduct before it is deemed to be ‘unwanted’. A serious one-off incident can
amount to harassment.

9.

Unwanted conduct ‘related’ to a protected characteristic has a broad meaning
and includes the following situations:
•

where the student has a protected characteristic

•

where there is any connection with a protected characteristic (whether or
not the student has that protected characteristic themselves) or it is
assumed there is a connection with a protected characteristic.

Sexual Harassment
10.

Sexual harassment occurs when a person engages in unwanted conduct (as
defined in 15.5.8 above) which is of a sexual nature.

11.

Conduct ‘of a sexual nature’ can cover verbal, non-verbal or physical conduct
including unwelcome sexual advances, touching, forms of sexual assault,
sexual jokes, displaying pornographic photographs or drawings, or sending
emails or sharing social media posts with material of a sexual nature.

Less favourable treatment for rejecting or submitting to unwanted
conduct
12.

The third type of harassment occurs when a student is treated less favourably
by an education provider because the student has submitted to, or rejected,
unwanted conduct of a sexual nature. This applies when the unwanted
conduct creates for them any of the circumstances defined in paragraph
15.5.1 above. Under this type of harassment, the initial unwanted conduct may
be committed by the education provider who treats the student less
favourably, or by another person.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Student Misconduct Procedure: page 13 of 31

Reporting Harassment and Discrimination
13.

There are several options for reporting harassment and discrimination.
Students can contact Student Wellbeing and Support directly by email.
Students can also use the Report Harassment and Bullying Form which can
be submitted anonymously, and also provides links to support and advice. If
students wish the University to follow up any such report, they should set out
as specifically as possible the nature of the harassment/discrimination, the
identity of the reported student(s), dates of occurrence etc. The report will be
dealt with thereafter in accordance with these Procedures, inclusive of any
right of appeal.

14.

A student who considers that they have been harassed, receives a complaint
of alleged harassment, or witnesses harassment, may wish to seek advice,
support and/or counselling before deciding how to proceed. In such
circumstances, students should contact Student Wellbeing and Support or the
Student Union. Support from the University is not contingent upon a student
choosing to pursue a complaint through misconduct proceedings.

15.

In dealing with allegations of harassment, the Head of Student Wellbeing and
Support (or nominee) will ensure that reporting students are kept informed of
the progress of a case, including its outcome. However, this does not extend
to the right to receive copies of correspondence between the University and
the reported student(s). If a reporting student has any concerns about how the
matter was handled, or the outcome, they will be directed to the Student
Complaints Procedure (see Section 17 of this Framework). If the reported
student’s behaviour is found to have had an adverse impact on the reporting
student, then a discretionary remedy might be offered by the University.

16.

The reporting student will not be exposed unwillingly to any face-to-face
meeting with the reported student(s). If a hearing is convened, and the
reporting student is willing to attend, they will have the same right to be
accompanied by a ‘friend’, where applicable, as the reported student(s). The
reporting student is not required to attend, and the case can proceed in their
absence.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Student Misconduct Procedure: page 14 of 31

17.

There will be no time bar, exclusion or redemption allowed for acts of past
harassment.

15.6 Acceptable Behaviour
The University recognises that involvement in the Student Misconduct
Procedure can be a stressful experience for students. However, it also has a
duty to ensure the safety and well-being of its staff and will, for example, not
accept communication that is abusive, offensive, defamatory, aggressive,
threatening, coercive, intimidating, unreasonably persistent or demanding.
Whatever the outcome of any investigations, the University will not tolerate
any form of intimidation, victimisation or discrimination against any student(s)
or members of the University community involved in these investigations. This
applies both to students and their supporters. Where such behaviour is
displayed, therefore, by a student it might constitute an instance of student
misconduct in its own right. Where such behaviour is displayed by the
supporter of a student, the University reserves the right to limit or terminate its
correspondence with that individual.

15.7 Student Misconduct – Stage One procedures
1.

The Head of Student Support and Wellbeing (or nominee) will meet with the
reporting student(s) to discuss the allegation. The reporting student will be
given an opportunity to provide supporting statements or evidence (either their
own, or from witnesses). Ideally this will be submitted in advance of the inperson interview held with the reported student, so they can be considered
within the discussion.

2.

The Head of Student Wellbeing and Support (or nominee) will notify the
reported student that an allegation has been made against them, to include
notification in writing. The letter will state the allegations and give details of a
date and time for an interview to discuss the allegations. The interview will

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Student Misconduct Procedure: page 15 of 31

take place no later than ten working days after the letter being sent. The
reported student may provide a statement in advance of the interview if they
wish. The reported student will also be offered the opportunity to respond to
any new or amended allegations should these arise during the course of
proceedings. The staff member carrying out the initial investigation should not
have been involved in making the allegation/s against the student.
3.

Prior to the interview, the Head of Student Wellbeing and Support (or
nominee) will collect any relevant additional information. This may involve
collecting witness statements from students, reports from staff, CCTV footage,
or other forms of information as suggested by the reporting and reported
students or other relevant parties.

4.

During the in-person interview, the Head of Student Wellbeing and Support (or
nominee) will discuss the allegations and collected evidence with the reported
student and advise them with regard to their future conduct. The purpose of
this interview is to determine if the misconduct occurred on ‘balance of
probabilities’, to offer the reported student an opportunity to provide context,
and to ensure all relevant information has been gathered in order to come to a
fair and balanced outcome.

5.

The Head of Student Wellbeing and Support (or nominee) will write to the
reported student within five working days after interview to confirm the
outcome and any recommendations with regard to future conduct. This will
include information about the student’s Right to Appeal. The letter will be
copied to the Academic Standards Officer, so that a central record can be
kept, and a record will be kept on the Student Wellbeing and Support
database.

6.

Should the reported student admit to a minor offence, their admission shall be
taken into account when considering which sanction/s to apply. Reported
students will be made aware of the consequences of agreeing to a sanction(s)
at this stage; for example, whether this will be taken into account in any future
proceedings.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Student Misconduct Procedure: page 16 of 31

7.

Where appropriate, the following limited sanctions can be applied at Stage
One:
•

a fine, not exceeding £100, in addition to any appropriate restitution for
damage or loss (to be reported in writing, using the designated form, to
Finance)

•

the prohibition of entry to specified areas of campus, including social
areas, and/or University social functions for the time specified by the
responsible officer

•

a recommendation to the Marjon Sports Federation (MSF) that a ban is
enforced on representing the University in any sporting event or activity for
the time specified by the responsible officer

•

a requirement to carry out community service for the time specified by the
responsible officer, up to a maximum period of one working day (defined as
seven hours)

•

a requirement to undertake appropriate remedial action to address the
student’s behaviour, such as an anger management programme or
diversity training (amongst other possible examples)

The Head of Student Wellbeing and Support (or nominee) may also issue an
informal warning to a student, accompanied by conditions, with regard to their
social media and/or other online activities.
8.

The Head of Student Wellbeing and Support (or nominee) may also decide to
escalate the case to Stage Two proceedings, based on the investigation and
interview, if it is felt that the sanctions available at Stage One are not
appropriate.

9.

The Head of Student Wellbeing and Support (or nominee) will normally meet
with the reporting student to inform them of the outcome subject to the
University’s data sharing and risk assessment process.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Student Misconduct Procedure: page 17 of 31

10.

Students are expected to co-operate with the Head of Student Wellbeing and
Support (or nominee). Should the reported student not respond to the request
for an interview or fail to attend the interview without good reason, this might
be sufficient grounds in itself for escalation to Stage Two. If grounds for
escalation to Stage Two are not met, the Head of Student Wellbeing and
Support (or nominee) will decide an outcome based on the available evidence.

11.

If the reported student does not engage with the outcomes, and does not
provide good reason for this, the Head of Student Wellbeing and Support (or
nominee) will decide if this is grounds in itself for escalation to Stage Two.

12.

All students involved in proceedings will be encouraged to engage in support
from the Student Union and/or Student Wellbeing and Support throughout this
process. Student Wellbeing and Support will ensure that a neutral member of
staff will be available to offer support, and that reported and reporting students
are treated fairly and offered support from separate members of staff.

15.8 Student Misconduct – Stage Two procedures
1.

In cases where an allegation of student misconduct has been identified which
might lead to a more serious sanction being imposed, the Head of Student
Wellbeing and Support (or nominee) will refer the matter to the Academic
Registrar, via the Academic Standards Officer, by way of a written incident
report. The preparation of the report should take any sensitive personal issues
and/or potential clashes of interest into account. The Head of Student
Wellbeing and Support (or nominee) will provide the reporting student an
opportunity to contribute to this report in the form of a statement.

2.

The report will state the name of the student against whom the allegation is
made, the date, time and place of the alleged misconduct if known and
applicable and the nature of the alleged misconduct with a brief description of
it. It should also include the names of any witnesses who can support the
allegation and notes of any interviews and discussions undertaken.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Student Misconduct Procedure: page 18 of 31

3.

In cases where, in the opinion of the Head of Student Wellbeing and Support
(or nominee) and colleagues as appropriate, the potential severity of an
offence might justify expulsion, they will also provide a written rationale for
recommending a formal hearing at Stage Three of the Procedures in the
context of their incident report.

4.

Before referring the report to the Academic Standards Officer, the Head of
Student Wellbeing and Support (or nominee) will notify the reported student
that an allegation of misconduct has been made against them, which will be
reviewed under Stage Two of the Misconduct Proceedings. The procedure will
be explained to the reported student in full, and they will have an opportunity
to ask questions and seek clarification. The reported student will also be
provided the opportunity to respond to the allegations in writing, should they
wish to do so, within a maximum period of ten working days.

5.

On receipt of the incident report and any supporting evidence, the Academic
Standards Officer (or nominee) will write to the reported student, advising
them that a Panel will be convened. The incident report and any supporting
evidence will be sent to the student at this point and the student will be
provided with a further opportunity to respond to the allegations in writing,
within a maximum period of five working days. Once the Panel has been
convened, the Academic Standards Officer will notify the reported student of
the date that the Panel will take place, and its members.

6.

The Academic Standards Officer (or nominee) will convene a Student
Misconduct Panel on behalf of the Academic Registrar. This shall comprise:
•

Chair: An appropriately qualified and experienced senior member of staff,
from the roster of Student Casework practitioners approved by the
Academic Registrar, who has had no involvement with the reported student
(or, where applicable, the reporting student)

•

An appropriately qualified and experienced senior member of staff, from
the roster of Student Casework practitioners approved by the Academic
Registrar, who has had no involvement with the student (or, where
applicable, the reporting student)

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Student Misconduct Procedure: page 19 of 31

•

A member of the Executive Committee of the Student Union, normally the
President or Deputy President, who also has no involvement with the
student (or, where applicable, the reporting student)

With regard to allegations of programme-specific misconduct, the Panel may
also include up to two additional external advisors with professional expertise
of the relevant discipline where practicable and at the request of the Chair.
They may either be academic colleagues at other institutions where the
discipline is taught or professional colleagues with appropriate knowledge and
experience. The advisors may attend the Panel hearing in person or provide
written commentary on the basis of the available evidence.
The Academic Standards Officer (or nominee) will endeavour to ensure that
the Panel includes at least one male and one female member.
7.

The incident report, any supporting evidence and any response from the
reported student will be circulated to the Panel and an initial meeting will be
arranged. This meeting will be attended by the Academic Standards Officer (or
nominee) who will offer procedural advice, where required, and record the
decision taken.

8.

The Panel may either issue a decision immediately or defer its decision,
pending any further information that it requires. This may involve meetings in
person with the reported/reporting student and/or other interested parties,
which can be conducted either by individual Panel members or the complete
Panel. These will not be formal hearings, but a notetaker may be present. If
any further information is required, or such a meeting is to be arranged, the
Academic Standards Officer (or nominee) will contact the relevant party or
parties to make the necessary arrangements. The reported student will be
notified in the case of a decision being deferred, with an expected timeframe
for a decision included in this notification.

9.

Where a sanction is agreed at Stage Two, any or all of the following penalties
can be imposed in addition to those available at Stage One:

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Student Misconduct Procedure: page 20 of 31

•

a fine, not exceeding £250, in addition to any appropriate restitution for
damage or loss (to be reported in writing, using the designated form, to
Finance)

•

the removal of a student either from a specific Hall of Residence or from
campus accommodation in its entirety, subject to their legal rights as
tenants

•

a formal warning as to a student’s future conduct, accompanied by such
reasonable conditions as may be deemed appropriate

•

a formal warning, accompanied by conditions, with regard to a student’s
social media and/or other online activities

•

conditions concerning the student’s future conduct or access to facilities

•

the suspension of access to specific Academic Department-based facilities
for a fixed period of time

•

suspension or removal from a programme that is professionally accredited,
with the option to transfer to a non-accredited programme at a similar level
(if available) with immediate effect

10.

The Panel may also refer the matter to Stage Three if, on the basis of the
finalised evidence base, it now considers that the potential severity of an
offence could justify expulsion.

11.

The resultant decision letter, which will be drafted by the Academic Standards
Officer (or nominee) for the approval of the Chair, should normally be sent
within thirty working days of the commencement of the Student Misconduct
Procedure. This will also provide information about the next steps in the
process (including the student’s right of appeal) and details of who the student
can contact with any queries or for advice and support. If the Panel has
agreed to refer the matter to Stage Three, clarification of the relationship
between Stages Two and Three will be provided to the student in writing along
with the Panel’s reasons for escalation.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Student Misconduct Procedure: page 21 of 31

12.

The Head of Student Wellbeing and Support (or nominee) will normally meet
with the reporting student to inform them of the outcome subject to the
University’s data sharing and risk assessment process.

13.

If the reported student does not engage with the outcomes, and does not
provide good reason for this, the Head of Student Wellbeing and Support or
(or nominee), in consultation with a member of the Executive Leadership
Team, normally the Academic Registrar, will decide if this is grounds in itself
for escalation to Stage Three.

14.

Students (both reporting and reported) will be encouraged to engage in
support from the Student Union and/or Student Wellbeing and Support
throughout this process. Student Wellbeing and Support will ensure that a
neutral member of staff will be available to offer support, and that reported and
reporting students are offered support from separate members of staff.

15.9 Student Misconduct – Stage Three procedures
1.

In cases where the severity of an offence is potentially such as to justify
expulsion, the decision will also be subject to a formal hearing of the Student
Misconduct Panel.

2.

The Academic Standards Officer (or nominee) will act as Secretary to the
Panel. If proceedings are recorded electronically by mutual agreement,
recordings will be made available to all participants on request. The hearing
will not take place unless all members and the Secretary are present.

3.

The reported student shall be informed of the date of the hearing by the
Academic Standards Officer (or nominee) not less than ten working days in
advance. This deadline can only be reduced with the student’s written
consent. They will be invited to appear in person but, in exceptional
circumstances, the hearing may take place at the discretion of the Chair,
advised by the Academic Registrar, in their absence or may be conducted
virtually in whole or in part. A hearing can be scheduled at any time in the

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Student Misconduct Procedure: page 22 of 31

calendar year, however reasonable steps will be taken to schedule this at a
point in the year when the student would normally be present in the University.
The University will only consider rearranging the date of the hearing if the
reported student or other witness is unable to attend for good reason. Where a
witness is unable to attend in person, they may be able to attend virtually in
order to avoid a delay in proceedings - this will be at the discretion of the
Chair, advised by the Academic Registrar,
4.

The reported student may be accompanied by a ‘friend’, who is permitted to
attend to provide advice and support to the student and can be heard only with
the agreement of both the student and the Chair. The name and status of any
such ‘friend’, who is expected to be a member of the University, must normally
be notified to the Academic Standards Officer (or nominee) at least five
working days in advance of the hearing. The University must grant its consent
beforehand for the ‘friend’ to attend the hearing. The student may also choose
to call witnesses in their defence.

5.

These Procedures are internal to the University and therefore legal
representation will not normally be permitted, although a reasoned request
can be made by the reporting student and will be considered. The University
reserves the right to refuse the request if the circumstances are not deemed
‘exceptional’.

6.

The Academic Standards Officer (or nominee) shall normally circulate the list
of witnesses to be called, and all relevant documentation, to all parties not less
than five working days before the hearing. Where this is not possible, the
Academic Standards Officer (or nominee) will advise the reported student who
will have the right to request a postponement. Additional papers supplied by or
on behalf of the student will be circulated thereafter with the proviso that, in
exceptional circumstances, the Panel may decide to adjourn a hearing in order
to secure a written response.

7.

The refusal or failure of a reported student to attend will not invalidate the
hearing’s proceedings, provided that they have been given sufficient notice as
set out above. Where a student has been denied access to the University

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Student Misconduct Procedure: page 23 of 31

under the provisions set out in Section 15.4.1 of this Framework, this will be
waived to enable the student to attend the interview. In such circumstances,
the student shall only attend the interview and not visit or stay in other areas of
campus.
8.

If a reporting student is unwilling to attend a face-to-face meeting with the
reported student, the Panel Chair will interview them prior to the hearing either
physically or virtually. A recording of the interview will be played back at the
hearing, so that the student facing the allegations can respond directly to the
points that have been made. The applicable timeframes can be adjusted to
accommodate this additional meeting, ensuring that both reporting and
reported students are made aware of these adjustments.

9.

At the outset of the hearing, the Chair of the Panel shall identify the issues to
be determined, the persons entitled to attend the hearing, and the documents
supplied to the Panel. They will also ask the reported student to confirm that
they have understood the procedures and have no concerns with regard to
procedure. In addition, they will advise the student that all those involved in
the hearing are expected to conduct themselves in an appropriate manner and
that they are empowered to suspend the hearing in exceptional
circumstances.

10.

The Chair will then outline the case against the reported student, before
inviting witnesses to give evidence. Members of the Panel may question
witnesses directly and the reported student may question the witnesses
through the Chair. Recorded evidence secured from a reporting student, in a
case of alleged harassment, will also be played back at this point.

11.

The Chair shall then invite the reported student to respond. The Chair and
other members of the Panel may question the student on the statement and/or
the documentary evidence. Witnesses may question the student through the
Chair.

12.

At the conclusion, the Chair shall invite the reported student to make a closing
statement (which should not introduce new evidence), once the witnesses
have left, before the Panel considers its decision in private. This can include

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Student Misconduct Procedure: page 24 of 31

any mitigating circumstances or factors that they believe should be taken into
account.
13.

In addition to the complete range of penalties available at Stage Two, the
Panel may impose any or all of the following penalties:
•

suspension from the University, for a period of time to be determined by
the Panel.

•

expulsion from the University (actual or suspended).

The default penalty at Stage Three will be expulsion, with scope for reduction
to suspended expulsion or suspension if there are mitigating circumstances. A
student’s previous disciplinary record may be taken into account when
determining the penalty, but the Chair and the Academic Standards Officer (or
nominee) will withhold it from the Panel until a decision has been taken as to
whether not an offence has been committed.
14.

The resultant Stage Three decision letter will be drafted by the Academic
Standards Officer (or nominee) for the approval of the Chair. It shall also
constitute the official record of the hearing including, where applicable, the
reasons for imposing a specific penalty or penalties and an explanation as to
why a lesser penalty was unsuitable. The letter will also provide information
about the next steps in the process (including the student’s right of appeal)
and details of who the student can contact with any queries or for advice and
support.

15.

The letter will normally be sent to the student within ten working days of the
hearing and within forty working days of the commencement of the Student
Misconduct Procedures. If this is not possible, exceptionally, the reported
student will be kept informed. Where a decision has been taken to suspend or
expel a student, it will take immediate effect.

16.

The University may inform the DBS or any other Professional, Statutory or
Regulatory Body of the outcome of the misconduct proceedings, where
applicable. If it intends to do so, it will include notification of that decision
within the decision letter.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Student Misconduct Procedure: page 25 of 31

17.

The Head of Student Wellbeing and Support (or nominee) will normally meet
with the reporting student to inform them of the outcome subject to the
University’s data sharing and risk assessment process.

18.

Students (both reporting and reported) will be encouraged to engage in
support from staff in Student Wellbeing and Support throughout this process.
Student Wellbeing and Support will ensure that a neutral member of staff will
be available to offer support, and that reported and reporting students are
treated fairly and offered support from separate members of staff.

19.

Whilst it is unlikely to be necessary, as part of proceedings, the Panel reserves
the right to seek legal advice and/or the advice of other external agencies as
appropriate.

15.10 Right of Appeal
1.

A reported student has the right of appeal against the decision and/or the
penalty imposed on the following grounds:
•

That the procedures were not followed properly.

•

That the decision maker(s) reached an unreasonable decision.

•

That the student has new material evidence that they were unable, for valid
reasons, to provide earlier in the process.

•

That there is bias or reasonable perception of bias during the procedure.

•

That the penalty imposed was disproportionate or not permitted under the
procedures.

Any such appeal must be submitted in writing to the Academic Standards
Officer (or nominee) within ten working days of the date of the letter
communicating the decision, normally by way of a single submission including
any relevant attachments. If the student does not appeal within this timeframe,
then the Academic Standards Officer (or nominee) will close the case. If the
Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Student Misconduct Procedure: page 26 of 31

reported student wishes to appeal, they can make use of support from Student
Wellbeing and Support to do so.
2.

The Academic Standards Officer (or nominee) will refer the appeal to a
member of the roster of Student Casework practitioners approved by the
Academic Registrar who has had no involvement with the student for
consideration. The appeal stage will normally be concluded within twenty
working days of the receipt of the appeal; if a delay is envisaged, the student
will be notified in writing before the end of the twenty working day period.

3.

If valid grounds to proceed with the appeal are not found, the University’s
Student Misconduct Procedures will have been exhausted, and the Academic
Standards Officer (or nominee) will advise the student accordingly.

4.

If, however, it is found that there may be additional evidence that could not
reasonably have been provided to the original hearing, or procedural
irregularities, the Academic Standards Officer (or nominee) will reconvene the
original decision-making body with new membership of a similar status. In all
such cases, the appeal process may lead to the confirmation, reduction or
quashing of the penalty originally imposed, but not to an increased penalty.
This re-hearing will be final and there will be no further right of appeal
thereafter.

5.

The student will be notified in writing of the decision, in accordance with the
procedures appropriate at the relevant stage. The decision letter will confirm
that the University’s Student Misconduct Procedures have been exhausted. If
the University’s handling of the procedure is found to have had an adverse
impact on the student, then a discretionary remedy might be offered by the
University.

15.11 Rights of Affected Students
Students who are the recipients of the alleged misconduct, whether or not they
have reported it in person, may be informed of the outcome of any subsequent
Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Student Misconduct Procedure: page 27 of 31

case at the discretion of the Head of Student Wellbeing and Support and
subject to the University’s data sharing and risk assessment process.
However, they will not be copied into any correspondence between the
University and the student/s concerned, in accordance with relevant data
protection legislation, and they will have no right of appeal against the
outcome (including any sanction that has been applied). This also applies to
any third parties acting on their behalf. Should a student who is the recipient of
the alleged misconduct have any concerns about how the matter was handled,
or the outcome, they will be directed to the Complaints Procedure (see
Section 17 of this Framework).

15.12 Office of the Independent Adjudicator for Higher Education
1.

If a student remains dissatisfied after the appropriate internal processes have
been exhausted, they can ask the University to issue a Completion of
Procedures letter in order for the Office of the Independent Adjudicator for
Higher Education (OIA) to review their appeal.

2.

The University must issue a Completion of Procedures letter in order for the
OIA to review an appeal. A Completion of Procedures letter will be issued
automatically where valid grounds for re-hearing the appeal are not found at
the review stage.

3.

All requests for review must be made to the OIA within twelve months of the
date of issue of a Completion of Procedures letter. For full details please
contact http://www.oiahe.org.uk. The University will draw the student’s
attention to any exceptional factors that mean that it is particularly important
for the student to bring the matter to the OIA’s attention promptly.

15.13 Reconsideration of the Same Offence
Normally, the University will not reconsider an offence once these procedures
have been invoked. However, if new evidence emerges which, for a good
Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Student Misconduct Procedure: page 28 of 31

reason beyond its control, was unavailable to the University at the time of the
original investigation, the University reserves the right to reconsider an
allegation and, in exceptional circumstances, re-open proceedings. If this
applies, then a new Student Misconduct Panel will be recruited, and this will
not include any previous members.

15.14 Annual Report
Each year, the Academic Standards Officer (or nominee) submits a report on
student casework to Senate, detailing (anonymously) general matters or
issues arising from recent student misconduct cases. Additional reports are
also submitted to the Finance and Resources Committee of the Board of
Governors on a regular basis. Senate will forward recommendations to other
relevant University committees so that broad concerns can be shared, and
appropriate action taken.

15.15 Procedures at Partner Organisations
1.

In accordance with the Good Practice Framework issued on behalf of the HE
sector by the Office of the Independent Adjudicator and Plymouth Marjon
University’s Collaborative Provision Regulations and Procedures, all students
registered for the University’s awards have the ultimate right to complain to the
University, irrespective of where they are studying. This right of complaint,
however, is not absolute and is subject to the precise wording of the
partnership agreement.

2.

The partner organisation, accordingly, should ensure that clear information
and guidance with regard to student misconduct is made available to all
students registered for the University’s awards. This should include clear
information about the sequence of processes involved and make clear the
channels through which dissatisfied students can contact the University
directly.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Student Misconduct Procedure: page 29 of 31

3.

Once the internal procedures of the partner organisation have been fully
exhausted, students who wish to take their case to the University for review
should ask the Academic Standards Officer in writing if they are eligible to do
so. Students may request a review of the decision on the following grounds
only:
•

That the procedures were not followed properly.

•

That the decision maker(s) reached an unreasonable decision.

•

That the student has new material evidence that they were unable, for valid
reasons, to provide earlier in the process.

•

That there is bias or reasonable perception of bias during the procedure.

•

That the penalty imposed was disproportionate or not permitted under the
procedures.

4.

If a case is eligible for review, the Academic Standards Officer (or nominee)
will refer the challenge to a member of the roster of Student Casework
practitioners approved by the Academic Registrar who has no involvement
with the partnership. If the challenge is upheld, the case will be referred back
to the partner organisation to be reheard under its own procedures. Otherwise,
the University will not refer the case back to the partner organisation to be
reheard and the Academic Standards Officer (or nominee) will advise the
student accordingly. This will include advice with regard to a student’s further
right of appeal to the Office of the Independent Adjudicator (OIA).

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Student Misconduct Procedure: page 30 of 31

Document Title

Plymouth Marjon University Student
Regulations Framework – Section 15 Student
Misconduct Procedure

Document Reference

L:\Student Regulations Framework\Student
Regulations Framework 2025-26

Version

3.13

Issuing Authority

Senate

Custodian

Academic Standards Officer

Document Date

16th October 2009

Last Amended

16th July 2025

Sensitivity

Unclassified

Circulation

Website

Effective from

September 2025

Review Date

Ongoing

Effective until

September 2026

History

Updated annually and subject to routine ongoing
revision, informed by the Good Practice
Framework. Subject to major review and extensive
revision, June 2020.

Equality Impact Assessment

Preliminary EIA conducted for SRF, December
2010. Updated Equality Analysis Form to be
submitted.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Student Misconduct Procedure: page 31 of 31

16. ACADEMIC APPEAL PROCEDURE
This section of the Student Regulations Framework applies to all taught
programmes of Plymouth Marjon University, whether undergraduate or
postgraduate and to all apprentices enrolled on the University’s apprenticeship
programmes, who are also classified as ‘students’ and referred to accordingly
throughout this Procedure.

16.1 Introduction
1.

The University, in accordance with the Good Practice Framework for Handling
Complaints and Academic Appeals and the expectations set out in the UK
Quality Code For Higher Education, defines an academic appeal as a ‘request
for a review of a decision of an academic body around a mark, outcome or
decision’.

2.

These procedures describe how students may submit an academic appeal
and the grounds on which they may do so. Students should read these
procedures carefully before deciding whether or not to formally appeal, and
should also note that parallel procedures are in place for complaints (see
Section 17 of this Framework). If a student is in doubt over any matter relating
to an intended appeal, advice may be sought from the Academic Standards
Officer.

3.

Appeals will be treated with due diligence and confidentiality. However, those
considering an appeal will normally require access to all the supporting
documentation in order to come to an informed decision.

4.

Appeals will not always produce the outcome preferred by a student.
However, whatever the decision, the student will be informed of the result of
an appeal and the reasons for it.

5.

If an academic appeal is of a particularly sensitive nature, and a student would
like to make some early enquiries on a confidential basis, s/he should contact

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Academic Appeal Procedure: page 1 of 13

the President or Deputy President of the Student Union or Student Wellbeing
and Support for advice.
6.

The University can make reasonable adjustments to the procedures on a
case-by-case basis to take account of the individual needs of students with
disabilities. Students are encouraged to discuss their requirements with the
Disability Team (Student Wellbeing and Support).
In addition, the University can consider making reasonable adjustments for
any student, where appropriate, to reflect their individual circumstances.
Students are encouraged to raise any such needs either when requesting or
submitting an appeal form, or at any stage during the appeal process, so that
the University can consider and implement appropriate adjustments.

16.2 Right of Appeal
1.

Students have a right of appeal against decisions taken, by the designated
Assessment Board on behalf of the University, that affect their academic
progress. These procedures set out the grounds of appeal permitted.

2.

Students should note that the University’s complaints procedure (see Section
17 of this Framework) should be invoked in other areas of potential dispute.
There may be appeals against academic decisions which refer to matters or
allegations that are, or that become, the subject of a formal complaint. In such
circumstances the Complaints Panel will determine the outcome of the appeal.

3.

Students will not be disadvantaged in any respect by submitting an academic
appeal.

16.3 Grounds of Appeal
1.

Appeals must be lodged on either or both of the following grounds:

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Academic Appeal Procedure: page 2 of 13

(a)

Material circumstances: factors affecting a student’s performance in
an assessment(s), which the Board of Examiners had been unaware of
when making its decision. These circumstances may only be
considered if the student can demonstrate that, for a sound and
acceptable reason, they had been unable to make them known at an
earlier time through the Extenuating Circumstances procedures

and/or
(b)

Procedural irregularities (i.e. alleged irregularities in the formal
conduct of an assessment or in reaching another academic decision,
including alleged prejudice or bias on the part of one or more
examiners and/or markers).

Evidence for each ground of appeal invoked must be provided. In exceptional
circumstances, where this might advantage the student or where a student
has not cited a specific ground for appeal, an appeal may also be considered
on permitted grounds which have not been cited.
2.

Appeals can only be lodged against specific module marks. It is not, therefore,
possible to lodge an appeal against an overall result including a degree
classification.

3.

A successful appeal cannot result in the raising of a mark that has already
been confirmed by an Assessment Board. Instead, it will normally result in the
granting of an additional assessment opportunity (e.g. new essay title),rather
than the re-assessment of previously submitted work, so that no student is
disadvantaged by the outcome of a successful appeal. The higher of the two
module marks will then be recorded.

16.4 Exclusions from Appeal
1.

The following grounds cannot be considered as the basis for an appeal:

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Academic Appeal Procedure: page 3 of 13

•

Dissatisfaction with the academic judgement of the internal and external
examiners and/or markers including the Board of Examiners.

•

Matters of dispute that are within the remit of the student complaints
procedure (see Section 17 of this Framework).

2.

As required by the University’s Marking Procedures set out in Section 12.5 of
this Framework, a sample of work from each assignment is double-marked to
ensure the accuracy and consistency of marking. This would normally rule out
a successful appeal on the ground of procedural irregularities, involving
alleged prejudice or bias.

3.

Academic appeals submitted outside of the timeframe set out in Section 16.8
of this Framework will only be considered if the student can show reasonable
grounds for not submitting the appeal within the deadline.

4.

Issues relating to the quality of teaching or supervision, or other circumstances
that relate to the delivery of a programme of study before the point of
assessment (including the submission of a thesis or dissertation), cannot be
pursued by way of these procedures. They should instead be raised under the
University's student complaints procedure within the stated timeframe (see
Section 17 of this Framework).

16.5 Acceptable Behaviour
1.

The University recognises that lodging an academic appeal can be a stressful
experience and that the overwhelming majority of students do so in an
appropriately constructive way. However, it also has a duty to ensure the
safety and well-being of its staff.

2.

Students (and, where appropriate, their representatives) are expected to use
the established procedures and channels of communication to bring and
resolve academic appeals. Under those circumstances, they can expect
University staff involved in their appeal to be impartial, fair and, above all,
helpful. However, the University will take action to protect its staff from

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Academic Appeal Procedure: page 4 of 13

unacceptable behaviour and will, for example, not accept communication that
is abusive, offensive, defamatory, aggressive, threatening, coercive,
intimidating and/or unreasonably persistent or demanding.
3.

If a student’s behaviour is deemed to be unacceptable, the University will
explain the reason(s) for this and will ask the student to modify their
behaviour. If the unacceptable behaviour continues, action will be taken to
restrict the student’s communication with the University on the authorisation of
the Academic Registrar. Under such circumstances, the student will be
provided in writing with the reason(s) why his/her behaviour has been deemed
unacceptable and the action/s that will be taken in response.

4.

Any restrictions imposed will be appropriate and proportionate and may
include the following (please note that these are not exhaustive):
•

Requiring contact in a particular form (e.g. in writing only)

•

Requiring that contact takes place with a single, named individual

•

Restricting telephone calls to specified days and times

•

Asking the student to appoint a representative to correspond with the
University

•
5.

Asking the student to enter into an agreement about their conduct

Where a student behaves unacceptably during a telephone conversation or a
face-to-face meeting the University may, as a last resort, terminate the call or
the meeting.

6.

Where unacceptable behaviour on the part of a student continues, despite the
student’s communication with the University having been restricted, the
University may terminate consideration of the appeal. Under these exceptional
circumstances, a Completion of Procedures Letter (as per Section 16.10 of
this Framework) will be issued.

7.

The University may also refuse to process an academic appeal if it considers it
to be frivolous or vexatious, issuing a Completion of Procedures Letter
accordingly. Examples of frivolous or vexatious appeals include, but are not
necessarily restricted to, the following:

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Academic Appeal Procedure: page 5 of 13

8.

•

Academic appeals which are obsessive, harassing or repetitive

•

Academic appeals which seek unrealistic and unreasonable outcomes

•

Academic appeals which are designed to cause disruption or annoyance

•

Demands for redress which lack any serious purpose or value

Anyone making malicious allegations concerning the reputation or conduct of
members of staff in the context of an appeal may be subject to Student
Misconduct proceedings, on the grounds that they have harmed or attempted
to harm the good order and discipline of the University, and/or brought the
University or its staff or students into disrepute.

16.6 Responsibilities of Students
1.

The responsibility for compiling documentation in support of an appeal,
including any supporting evidence, rests with the student in accordance with
the procedures set out in Section 16.8 of this Framework.

2.

Students should note the time constraints outlined in these procedures and
respond to any communications relating to their appeal in a timely manner.

3.

Students should ensure that they are fully aware of the timing and the
conditions of any assessments, including the deadlines that apply to them.
Where this responsibility has not been exercised, the University reserves the
right to decide that a valid case for appeal has not been made.

4.

A student who submits an appeal must continue to undertake all resit
opportunities, as its success cannot be guaranteed.

16.7 Informal Resolution
Academic appeals can only be made formally, following the publication of
results. However, students who may have grounds for appeal, or who seek
clarification of an Assessment Board’s decision, are invited to discuss their

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Academic Appeal Procedure: page 6 of 13

concerns with the appropriate Dean of Faculty, Academic Director, or
Programme Leader/Programme Area Leader immediately following the
publication of results. In certain circumstances, where appropriate and
proportionate, students may be provided with a written outcome which will be
taken into account in the event of a subsequent appeal.

16.8 Submission of Appeal
1.

Students can appeal only after the relevant Board has met and the official
communication notifying results has been sent. Students who are aware that
they might wish to lodge an appeal at this point are advised to retain any
relevant correspondence and associated paperwork.

2.

Should a student intend to appeal, they should request an appeal submission
form from the Academic Standards Officer by emailing the Quality and
Academic Standards Unit, as notified in the official results communication.

3.

A completed appeal submission form should be returned to the Academic
Standards Officer or nominee (preferably by way of e-mail with scanned
attachments in .pdf format), with all relevant supporting evidence, within
twenty working days from the date of the communication notifying
results. A student should send copies of any evidence supplied in support of
their appeal, to avoid any risk that the originals will be lost. Students will also
be invited to complete an anonymous questionnaire for equality monitoring
purposes.

4.

On receipt of the completed appeal form, the Academic Standards Officer or
nominee shall acknowledge the appeal and carry out an initial assessment.
This may result in:
•

The appeal being rejected, for example because it is late, the outcome the
student is hoping for cannot be achieved under the Academic Appeal
Procedure, or it falls outside of the permitted grounds for an appeal (see
Section 16.3 and 16.4). Where applicable, the student will be directed to a

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Academic Appeal Procedure: page 7 of 13

different procedure. The reason/s for the rejection will be explained to the
student, who will be able to request a review of the decision at this point (See
Section 16.9 - Review Stage).
•

The appeal being redirected to the Complaints Procedure if it includes
grounds for a complaint (in accordance with Section 17 of this Framework).

•

The appeal being accepted for formal consideration.

The student will normally be informed of the process to be followed in relation to
their appeal submission within five working days of its receipt.

Formal Stage
5.

If accepted for formal consideration, the Academic Standards Officer or
nominee will forward the appeal to an appropriately qualified and experienced
senior member of academic staff, from the roster of Student Casework
practitioners approved by the Academic Registrar, who has no involvement
with the student.

6.

When investigating the appeal, the senior member of academic staff may
decide to seek additional information, either from relevant University
colleagues and/or the student. Where supplied by University colleagues, this
information will be made available to the student on request. In exceptional
cases, the senior member of academic staff may decide to meet with
colleagues and/or the student to obtain additional information, making a brief
note of the meeting which will be made available on the same terms.

7.

Once the senior member of academic staff has reached a decision, they will
communicate their decision to the Academic Standards Officer or nominee
who will advise the student in writing. The University aims to communicate its
decision as quickly as possible and within twenty working days of receipt of
the full appeal submission from the student. If a delay is envisaged, i.e. in
excess of five working days, the student will be notified in writing before the
end of the twenty working day period.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Academic Appeal Procedure: page 8 of 13

8.

If the appeal is upheld, the case will be referred back to the Chair of the
Module Assessment Board (MAB) or Progression and Award Board (PAB) so
that they can take Chair’s Action to change the Board’s initial
recommendations. In this case, the University will follow its normal
procedures, including involvement of External Examiners where appropriate.
Care will be taken to ensure student confidentiality and equity in the treatment
of marks.

9.

If the relevant Board changes its original recommendation, the change of
recommendation will be confirmed to the student in writing and reported to its
next meeting.

10.

If the appeal is not upheld, the Academic Standards Officer or nominee shall
set out the student’s right to challenge the decision in the decision letter. This
will explain the grounds under which a student may request a review of the
decision, and make it clear that - if the student does not take the academic
appeal to the review stage within the time limit for doing so - the appeal will be
closed automatically.

16.9 Review Stage
1.

The student may request a review of the decision on the following grounds
only:
•

That the procedures were not followed properly.

•

That the decision maker(s) reached an unreasonable decision.

•

That the student has new material evidence that they were unable, for valid
reasons, to provide earlier in the process.

•

That there is bias or reasonable perception of bias during the procedure.

Any such request must be submitted in writing to the Academic Standards
Officer or nominee, within ten working days of the date of the letter
communicating the decision.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Academic Appeal Procedure: page 9 of 13

2.

The Academic Standards Officer or nominee will refer the challenge to a
second appropriately qualified and experienced senior member of staff, from
the roster of Student Casework practitioners approved by the Academic
Registrar, who has had no involvement with the student or the appeal. If no
valid grounds for re-hearing the appeal are found, the University’s Academic
Appeal procedure will have been exhausted, and the Academic Standards
Officer or nominee will advise the student accordingly. This will constitute a
Completion of Procedures Letter (see Section 16.10 of this Framework).

3.

If, however, it is found that there are valid grounds for re-hearing the appeal,
the decision will be overturned, and the Academic Standards Officer or
nominee will re-convene the formal stage of the appeals procedure. The
appeal will be re-heard, accordingly, by a third appropriately qualified and
experienced senior member of staff, from the roster of Student Casework
practitioners approved by the Academic Registrar, who has had no
involvement with the student or the appeal, under the procedures set out in
Section 16.8 of this Framework. This re-hearing will be final and there will be
no further right of appeal thereafter.

4.

The review stage will normally be concluded within ten working days of the
receipt of the student’s request. Where it is agreed that the formal stage
should be re-convened, the timescales set out in Section 16.8 of this
Framework will apply and the processing time recorded for the appeal will be
reset accordingly.

16.10

Office of the Independent Adjudicator for Higher
Education

1.

If a student remains dissatisfied after the appropriate internal processes have
been exhausted, they can ask the University to issue a Completion of
Procedures letter in order for the Office of the Independent Adjudicator for
Higher Education (OIA) to review their appeal.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Academic Appeal Procedure: page 10 of 13

2.

The University must issue a Completion of Procedures letter in order for the
OIA to review an appeal. A Completion of Procedures letter will be issued
automatically where valid grounds for re-hearing the appeal are not found at
the review stage and otherwise on request. If a Completion of Procedures
letter is issued before the review stage has been conducted, the letter will
make it clear that the student has not completed the University’s internal
procedures.

3.

All requests for review must be made to the OIA within twelve months of the
date of issue of a Completion of Procedures letter. For full details please
contact http://www.oiahe.org.uk.

16.11

Annual Report

The Academic Standards Officer submits an annual report on student
casework to Senate, detailing (anonymously) general matters or issues arising
from recent academic appeals. Additional reports are also submitted to the
Finance and Resources Committee of the Board of Governors on a regular
basis. Senate will forward recommendations to other relevant University
committees so that broad concerns can be shared and appropriate action
taken. In addition, the Academic Standards Officer will collate and present
anonymised monitoring information with regard to academic appeals to
Senate at appropriate intervals.

16.12
1.

Procedures at Partner Organisations

Students registered for the University’s awards, irrespective of where they are
studying, must normally appeal to the University direct. Details of how they
can do so will be included in the official communication notifying results, and
the procedure, thereafter, will be identical to that which applies to students on
the University’s home campus.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Academic Appeal Procedure: page 11 of 13

2.

Where this is not the case, in accordance with the expectations set out in the
UK Quality Code For Higher Education and the University’s Collaborative
Provision Regulations and Procedures, all students registered for the
University’s awards have the ultimate right to appeal to the University,
irrespective of where they are studying.

3.

The partner organisation, accordingly, should ensure that clear information
and guidance with regard to academic appeals is made available to all
students registered for the University’s awards. This should explain whether
students should appeal to the University directly, or whether appeals should
be made to the partner organisation in the first instance.

4.

Once the internal procedures of the partner organisation have been fully
exhausted, where this is applicable, students who wish to take their case to
the University for review should ask the Academic Standards Officer in writing
if they are eligible to do so. The student may request a review of the decision
on the following grounds only:
•

That the procedures were not followed properly.

•

That the decision maker(s) reached an unreasonable decision.

•

That the student has new material evidence that they were unable, for valid
reasons, to provide earlier in the process.

•
5.

That there is bias or reasonable perception of bias during the procedure.

If a case is eligible for review, the Academic Standards Officer or nominee will
refer the challenge to an appropriately qualified and experienced senior
member of academic staff, from the roster of Student Casework practitioners
approved by the Academic Registrar, who has no involvement with the
partnership. If the challenge is upheld, the case will be referred back to the
partner organisation to be reheard under its own procedures. Otherwise, the
University will not refer the case back to the partner organisation to be reheard
and the Academic Standards Officer or nominee will advise the student
accordingly. This will include advice with regard to a student’s further right of
appeal to the Office of the Independent Adjudicator (OIA).

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Academic Appeal Procedure: page 12 of 13

Document Title

Plymouth Marjon University Student
Regulations Framework – Section 16 Academic
Appeals

Document Reference

L:\Student Regulations Framework\Student
Regulations Framework 2025-26

Version

3.13

Issuing Authority

Senate

Custodian

Academic Standards Officer

Document Date

16th October 2009

Last Amended

16th July 2025

Sensitivity

Unclassified

Circulation

Website

Effective from

September 2025

Review Date

Ongoing

Effective until

September 2026

History

Updated annually and subject to routine ongoing
revision, informed by the Good Practice
Framework.

Equality Impact Assessment

Preliminary EIA conducted for SRF, December
2010. Updated Equality Analysis Form to be
submitted.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Academic Appeal Procedure: page 13 of 13

17. COMPLAINTS PROCEDURE
This section of the Student Regulations Framework applies to all taught
programmes of Plymouth Marjon University, whether undergraduate or
postgraduate, to all research degree students and to all apprentices enrolled
on the University’s apprenticeship programmes, who are classified as
‘students’ and referred to accordingly throughout this Procedure.

17.1 The University’s Commitment on Complaints
1.

Plymouth Marjon University is committed to delivering a high-quality service
and encourages its students to tell it where there is cause for concern and a
case for improvement. Whilst this is normally achieved through student
feedback mechanisms at module and programme level, there are exceptional
occasions where a complaint needs to be taken further.

2.

The University reviews its complaints procedure annually with a strong
emphasis being placed upon protecting the consumer rights of its students. It
aims to be as clear and concise as possible, reflecting the University’s
commitment to plain English in public communication. Further details of the
University’s compliance with the Competition and Markets Authority (CMA)
can be found here.

3.

Students who are considering making a complaint, or who need help or further
information, are advised to discuss the matter first with the Student Union
and/or Student Wellbeing and Support.

4.

The University, in accordance with the Good Practice Framework for Handling
Complaints and Academic Appeals and the expectations set out in the UK
Quality Code For Higher Education, defines a complaint as ‘a specific query
about an aspect of experience of the provider’. It aims to handle all such
complaints in a way that:
•

Encourages informal conciliation

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Complaints Procedure: page 1 of 20

•

Is fair and efficient

•

Treats complaints with appropriate seriousness, sympathy and
confidentiality

•

Facilitates early resolution

•

Allows the University as a whole or a particular part of the University to
learn from the experience

5.

•

Aligns with the University’s commitment to equality and diversity

•

Has due regard to any applicable law

The University can make reasonable adjustments to the procedures on a
case-by-case basis to take account of the individual needs of students with
disabilities. Students are encouraged to discuss their requirements with the
Disability Team (Student Wellbeing and Support).
In addition, the University can consider making reasonable adjustments for
any student, where appropriate, to reflect their individual circumstances.
Students are encouraged to raise any such needs either when submitting a
complaint or at any stage during the complaint process, so that the University
can consider and implement appropriate adjustments.

6.

Students making a complaint will be described in this section of the
Framework as ‘complainants’.

7.

Complaints from applicants concerning admissions decisions will be
considered under this procedure. However, once all relevant internal
processes have been completed, applicants who remain dissatisfied will not
be eligible for an external review of their case by the Office of the Independent
Adjudicator (OIA), unless they are former students seeking re-admission and
their complaint relates directly to their previous period of study at the
University, in accordance with the OIA’s rules (www.oiahe.org.uk).

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Complaints Procedure: page 2 of 20

17.2 How to Complain
1.

The University’s complaints procedures are set out below. Students who
complain may wish to inform relevant members of staff that they are doing so
under the procedures.

2.

The University’s complaints procedures focus on matters that affect the quality
of a student’s learning opportunities. However, students should also note that
for the following matters of potential dispute, separate procedures apply:
•

Unacceptable conduct on the part of a student (see below)

•

Unacceptable conduct on the part of a member of staff (see below)

•

Academic appeals (see Section 16 of this Framework)

•

Complaints against the Student Union (procedures available from the
Student Union)

3.

If a complaint refers to matters or allegations that are, or that become, the
subject of an appeal against an academic decision, the Complaints Panel will
determine the outcome of the appeal.

4.

Where unacceptable conduct on the part of a student is alleged, the allegation
should be pursued initially with the Head of Student Wellbeing and Support (or
nominee) so that the appropriate procedures, as set out in Section 15 of this
Framework, can be instigated. This is because students are not employed by
the University and, therefore, are not part of the service that it provides.

5.

Where unacceptable conduct on the part of a member of staff is alleged, the
allegation should be pursued initially with the Executive Director of People &
Culture (via Student Wellbeing and Support at the discretion of the student).
This is because separate procedures exist with regard to staff disciplinary
issues.

6.

A student who is dissatisfied with the way in which their allegation of
unacceptable conduct, on the part of a student or a member of staff, has been
dealt with can invoke the formal stage of the complaints procedure. Whilst a

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Complaints Procedure: page 3 of 20

Complaints Panel cannot consider or authorise disciplinary action against a
student or a member of staff, it may review the conduct of the Student
Misconduct or staff disciplinary procedures and recommend their re-opening
where appropriate.
7.

Complaints can only be made by students or former students at the University.
Former students can submit a complaint provided that they do so within three
months after their programme of study has formally ceased or (if eligible to
graduate) the date of graduation. As explained in Section 17.9 of this
Framework, non-members of the University may attend Complaints Panel
hearings to provide advice and support to the complainant and they can also
be heard with the agreement of both the complainant and the Chair. However,
if a complainant is unable to attend a Complaints Panel hearing, then they will
not be permitted to send a non-member of the University as a representative
on their behalf.

17.3 Acceptable Behaviour
1.

The University recognises that bringing a complaint can be a stressful
experience, but that the overwhelming majority of complainants do so in an
appropriately constructive way. However, it also has a duty to ensure the
safety and well-being of its staff.

2.

Complainants (and, where appropriate, their representatives) are expected to
use the established procedures and channels of communication to bring and
resolve formal complaints and, under those circumstances, they can expect
University staff involved in their complaint to be impartial, fair and above all
helpful. However, the University will take action to protect its staff from
unacceptable behaviour and will, for example, not accept communication that
is abusive, offensive, defamatory, aggressive, threatening, coercive,
intimidating, unreasonably persistent or demanding.

3.

If a complainant’s behaviour is deemed to be unacceptable, the University will
explain the reason(s) for this and will ask the complainant to modify their

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Complaints Procedure: page 4 of 20

behaviour. If the unacceptable behaviour continues, action will be taken to
restrict the complainant’s communication with the University on the
authorisation of the Academic Registrar. Under such circumstances, the
complainant will be issued with a letter that sets out the reason(s) why their
behaviour has been deemed unacceptable and the action/s that will be taken
in response.
4.

Any restrictions imposed will be appropriate and proportionate and may
include the following (please note that these are not exhaustive):
•

Requiring contact in a particular form (e.g. by letter only)

•

Requiring that contact takes place with a single, named individual

•

Restricting telephone calls to specified days and times

•

Asking the complainant to appoint a representative to correspond with the
University

•
5.

Asking the complainant to enter into an agreement about their conduct

Where a complainant behaves unacceptably during a telephone conversation
or an in-person or virtual meeting, the University may, as a last resort,
terminate the call or the meeting.

6.

Where unacceptable behaviour on the part of a complainant continues,
despite the complainant’s communication with the University having been
restricted, the University may terminate consideration of the complaint. Under
these exceptional circumstances, a Completion of Procedures Letter (as per
Section 17.11 of this Framework) will be issued.

7.

The University may also refuse to process a formal complaint if it considers it
to be frivolous or vexatious, issuing a Completion of Procedures Letter
accordingly. Examples of frivolous or vexatious complaints include, but are not
necessarily restricted to, the following:
•

Complaints which are obsessive, harassing or repetitive

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Complaints Procedure: page 5 of 20

8.

•

Complaints which seek unrealistic and unreasonable outcomes

•

Complaints which are designed to cause disruption or annoyance

•

Demands for redress which lack any serious purpose or value

Anyone making malicious allegations concerning the reputation or conduct of
students or members of staff in the context of a complaint may be subject to
misconduct proceedings, on the grounds that they have harmed or attempted
to harm the good order and discipline of the University, and/or brought the
University or its staff or students into disrepute.

17.4 Results of Complaints
Complaints will not always produce the outcome preferred by a complainant.
For instance, policy decisions or resourcing beyond the University’s control
may affect the level of service provided. In addition, a successful complaint
might not benefit a complainant directly if it results, for example, in service
improvements applicable to students in the future.

17.5 Anonymity with Regard to Complaints
1.

In general, those about whom complaints are made, under these specific
procedures, will be informed about the source and content of a complaint. If
this is likely to deter a student from making a complaint, they are invited to
contact the Academic Standards Officer to discuss. An anonymous complaint
will only be investigated in exceptional circumstances, where there is a
compelling case (supported by appropriate evidence) to justify its
investigation.

2.

A copy of the complaint will normally be supplied to all affected parties.

3.

A complainant will not suffer recrimination as a result of making a complaint
unless it contains malicious unfounded allegations.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Complaints Procedure: page 6 of 20

17.6 Confidentiality of Complaints
The University expects the confidentiality of the documentation generated by a
complaint to be respected by all parties. Information received during
investigations will remain confidential to those involved in the process and
those who may need to be consulted in order to reach an outcome. Where
disclosure to a third party is necessary to progress a complaint, the affected
party will be notified in advance of the disclosure. No third party should be told
any more than is reasonably necessary to obtain the required information from
them.

17.7 Group Complaints
1.

On occasions, a group of students might wish to raise a complaint. Under
these circumstances, the best way to do so is by way of an identified
spokesperson. Each member of the group must agree in writing to the
spokesperson, and they will also be invited to submit separate copies of the
equal opportunities monitoring form. Where separate complaints are
submitted, the University reserves the right to process them together subject
to any data protection issues that might apply.

2.

The decision letter will be sent to the spokesperson (where applicable) at the
early resolution and formal stages. However, as each member of the group
would have the ultimate right to ask the Office of the Independent Adjudicator
for Higher Education (OIA) to review their complaint if it remains unresolved
after the final stage of the process (as per Section 17.11 of this Framework),
separate Completion of Procedures Letters will be issued at that point.

17.8 Early Resolution Stage (Stage One)
1.

The Early Resolution Stage (Stage One) is designed to address
straightforward concerns quickly at a local level, and the University expects

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Complaints Procedure: page 7 of 20

that the majority of issues can be resolved at this stage without the need to
instigate the formal procedures. Complainants are invited to raise any issues
with the appropriate member/s of staff, either in writing or verbally, and should
indicate the outcome being sought. The appropriate member/s of staff include,
but are not necessarily restricted to, the following:
•

Academic: Programme/Programme Area Leader and/or Personal
Development Tutor

•

Accommodation: Campus Services Manager

•

Admissions: Admissions Manager

•

Equality and Diversity: Inclusion Co-ordinator

•

Estates (apart from accommodation): Head of Estates and Campus
Development

•

Finance: Finance Director

•

IT: Head of Digital and IT Services

•

Library: Library Team Leader (or nominee)

•

Registry Services: Academic Registrar

•

Sports Centre: Sports Centre Operations Manager

•

Welfare: Head of Student Wellbeing and Support (or nominee)

Any issues that do not fall into these categories should be communicated to
the Head of Student Wellbeing and Support (or nominee) in the first instance.
2.

The appropriate member of staff will advise the Academic Standards Officer,
via the Quality and Academic Standards Unit, that a concern has been raised.
The appropriate member of staff will investigate and try to resolve the concern
in consultation with the complainant. The appropriate member of staff will
liaise with relevant colleagues, if applicable, and alert the Executive
Leadership Team member/Dean of Faculty who is responsible for their area, if

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Complaints Procedure: page 8 of 20

deemed appropriate. The appropriate member of staff, as part of their
investigation, should take the following points into account:
•

What specifically is the concern about?

•

What outcome is the student hoping for and can it be achieved?

•

Is the concern straightforward and likely to be resolved with little or no
investigation?

•

Can it be resolved on the spot by providing, where appropriate, an
explanation, an alternative solution or an apology?

•

Can someone else help to resolve the issue, for example where an
informal administrative resolution is required?

•

Would it be helpful to use confidential mediation or conciliation, and are the
student and the provider willing to do so?

•

What assistance or support can be provided to the student in taking this
forward, including whether any reasonable adjustments need to be made
to help the complainant to engage with the process?

The Academic Standards Officer (or nominee) can also advise with regard to
the handling of an informal complaint, particularly with regard to precedent.
Where it is clear that early resolution is not appropriate or possible, and that
the complainant’s concern needs to move to the formal process, the
appropriate member of staff should promptly direct the student to the Formal
Stage (Stage Two) of this procedure (Section 17.9).
3.

Concerns should be raised within twenty working days of the relevant incident
or incidents in the case of current students, otherwise, they will normally be
rejected on the grounds that a sound investigation can no longer be
conducted. Concerns from former students must be raised within three months
after their programme of study has formally ceased or (if eligible to graduate)
the date of graduation.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Complaints Procedure: page 9 of 20

4.

The appropriate member of staff will advise the Academic Standards Officer,
via the Quality and Academic Standards Unit, of their response. The Academic
Standards Officer (or nominee) will respond to the complainant in writing,
sharing their response with appropriate members of staff, and will maintain a
central record of all such concerns.

5.

A response should normally be sent within fifteen working days of receipt of
the complaint. If a delay is envisaged, the complainant should be notified in
writing before the end of the fifteen working day period. Where a complainant
requests additional information, every effort should be made to provide this
within ten working days of the receipt of the request.

17.9 Formal Stage (Stage Two)
1.

The Formal Stage (Stage Two) can be activated if any of the following apply:
•

a complainant remains dissatisfied with the response received at the Early
Resolution Stage (Stage One) and wishes to escalate their complaint.

•

the complaint is regarding the way in which The People Team have
investigated an earlier complaint of alleged unacceptable conduct, on the
part of a member of staff.

•

the matter cannot be resolved without gathering extensive evidence.

•

the Academic Standards Officer (or nominee) allows the complainant to
initiate the formal process immediately, by exception, at the complainant’s
request; for example, when the complainant can provide good reason for
not wanting to engage with the Early Resolution Stage.

•

the Academic Standards Officer (or nominee) in liaison with the Academic
Registrar, determines, by exception, that the complaint should be escalated
immediately to the formal process, for example because early resolution

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Complaints Procedure: page 10 of 20

would be inappropriate due to the nature, complexity, or seriousness of the
complaint, and/or the outcome being sought.
•

the complaint is brought by a former student and there is no ongoing
relationship with the University.

2.

The complainant should contact the Academic Standards Officer, via the
Quality and Academic Standards Unit, to request a Complaints Submission
Form, if not already provided. The Academic Standards Officer (or nominee)
will supply the Complaints Submission Form, which will include an anonymous
questionnaire for equality monitoring purposes, and indicate any possible
sources of advice and support as appropriate. The complainant should contact
the Academic Standards Officer if they feel they need to submit their complaint
in an alternative format.

3.

Completed Complaints Submission Forms from current students must be
received within twenty working days of the relevant incident or, where
applicable, within twenty working days of the conclusion of Stage One.
Completed Submission Forms from former students must be received within
three months after their programme of study has formally ceased or (if eligible
to graduate) the date of graduation.

4.

The complainant should send copies of any evidence supplied in support of
their complaint, to avoid any risk that the originals will be lost. Moreover,
complainants should respond to any communications relating to their
complaint in a timely manner. The University reserves the right to take steps to
verify the evidence and, if it is found not to be genuine, it may consider the
matter under Section 15 (Student Misconduct Procedure). Recordings made in
support of a complaint will be accepted, as long as they are made available to
the University not less than five days in advance of a hearing (as per Section
17.9.13 of this Framework) and were made with the knowledge and consent of
the relevant colleagues. In addition, the University reserves the right to check
recordings with a sound engineer and to reschedule a hearing for this purpose
in exceptional circumstances.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Complaints Procedure: page 11 of 20

5.

The Academic Standards Officer (or nominee) will normally acknowledge all
complaints within five working days of receipt, and issue a decision within
thirty working days of receipt of the full complaint submission, if possible. If a
delay is envisaged, the complainant will be notified in writing before the end of
the thirty working day period. Where exceptional factors affect the timing of
these procedures, reasonable attempts will be made to avoid undue delay in
the processing of complaints. Where a complainant requests additional
information, every effort will be made to provide this within ten working days of
the receipt of the request.

6.

Whilst every attempt will be made to expedite complaints that may require
particularly swift action, due process will always be carried out and
arrangements for Complaints Panel hearings will not be compromised.

7.

On receipt of the completed submission form and associated evidence, the
Academic Standards Officer (or nominee) will nominate an appropriately
qualified and experienced senior member of staff, from the roster of Student
Casework practitioners approved by the Academic Registrar, who has no
involvement with the complainant or the complaint, to chair the Complaints
Panel. The Chair will determine the witnesses to be called to the Panel and
the documentation to be circulated to all parties in advance of the meeting,
advised by the Academic Standards Officer (or nominee) as appropriate. This
will include a formal response from the relevant academic or service area of
the University, to be circulated to the complainant not less than five working
days in advance of the meeting, where such a response has not already been
provided.

8.

The Panel Chair, advised by the Academic Standards Officer (or nominee),
may suspend consideration where relevant supporting evidence has not been
supplied, if a practicable remedy has not been proposed by the complainant or
in other exceptional circumstances. Where additional information is requested
from a complainant, this should normally be received within twenty working
days of the request. In such cases, where any discrepancies have not been
addressed within this period the University reserves the right, exceptionally, to

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Complaints Procedure: page 12 of 20

reject a complaint without recourse to a Complaints Panel and issue a
Completion of Procedures Letter accordingly.
9.

Subject to any suspension of consideration as above, the Academic
Standards Officer (or nominee) will convene a Complaints Panel. This shall
comprise:
•

An appropriately qualified and experienced senior member of staff, from
the roster of Student Casework practitioners approved by the Academic
Registrar (Chair).

•

A second appropriately qualified and experienced senior member of staff,
from the roster of Student Casework practitioners approved by the
Academic Registrar.

•

A member of the Executive Committee of the Student Union, normally the
President or Deputy President, who also has no involvement with the
student or the complaint.

The Academic Standards Officer (or nominee) will act as Secretary to the
Panel and proceedings may also be recorded, either electronically or by a
minute taker, by mutual agreement. The Panel will not meet unless all
members and the Secretary are present. The Academic Standards Officer (or
nominee) will endeavour to ensure that the Panel includes at least one male
and one female member.
10.

The complainant shall be informed of the date of the meeting of the Panel and
the venue, which will normally be a formal meeting room on the University
campus, not less than ten working days in advance. This deadline can only be
reduced with the complainant’s written consent. Advice will also be provided to
the complainant with regard to the timeframe for the meeting and the
opportunities available for them to present their case.

11.

The complainant will be invited to appear in person but, in exceptional
circumstances, the Panel may also hear a case, at the discretion of the Chair
advised by the Academic Standards Officer (or nominee), in their absence. A

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Complaints Procedure: page 13 of 20

Panel can be scheduled at any time in the calendar year; however reasonable
steps will be taken to schedule it at a point in the year when the student would
normally be present in the University.
12.

The complainant may be accompanied by a ‘friend’, who is permitted to attend
to provide advice and support to the complainant and can be heard only with
the agreement of both the complainant and the Chair. The name and status of
any such ‘friend’ must normally be notified to the Academic Standards Officer
(or nominee) no less than five working days in advance of the hearing. The
University must grant its consent beforehand for the ‘friend’ to attend the
meeting.

13.

The Academic Standards Officer (or nominee) shall normally circulate the list
of witnesses to be called, and all relevant documentation, to all parties not less
than five working days before the meeting. Where this is not possible, the
Academic Standards Officer (or nominee) will advise the complainant who will
have the right to request a postponement. Complainants may submit
additional information in support of their complaint, although if this is circulated
less than five working days before the meeting its inclusion will be at the
discretion of the Panel Chair.

14.

Complainants have the right to call witnesses on the same basis as the
University. Any such witnesses should also be notified to the Academic
Standards Officer (or nominee) not less than five working days before the
meeting.

15.

The meeting will commence with private discussions within the Panel to clarify
matters of process. The complainant will then be called to appear, along with
any 'friend' that they have nominated, followed by the members of University
staff involved in the complaint. The complainant and the members of
University staff will then be invited to make a statement to the Panel, after
which the Panel will interview all parties in order to obtain the information it
requires to reach an informed decision. This may involve discussion between
the complainant and the members of University staff, which must be
conducted through the Chair of the Panel. The complainant will then be invited

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Complaints Procedure: page 14 of 20

to make a final statement to the Panel, in the absence of the members of
University staff, after which the Panel shall consider its decision in private. In
exceptional circumstances, the Panel might reserve its decision, pending the
outcome of additional investigations and appropriate correspondence.
Meetings can be adjourned and reconvened in exceptional circumstances.
16.

The Academic Standards Officer (or nominee) shall notify the complainant in
writing of the Panel’s decision, and the reasoning behind that decision,
normally within ten working days of the meeting. This letter, which will also
constitute the official record of the meeting, will explain the grounds under
which a complainant may request a review of the decision, and make it clear
that if the complainant does not take the formal complaint to the review stage
within the time limit for doing so the complaint will be closed automatically.

17.

The University may award compensation to a complainant when a complaint is
upheld either in whole or in part. A proposed compensatory payment is
agreed, in the first instance, by a Complaints Panel. Compensatory payments
can only be agreed by a Complaints Panel and cannot, therefore, be made at
the early resolution stage (Stage One).

18.

The University’s Refund and Compensation Policy will determine the level of
the payment and will be supplied to complainants for information on request.
Payments that exceed a predetermined amount will be subject to the
ratification of the University’s Executive Leadership Team. Contestation of the
payment offer can only be considered at the review stage (Stage Three) on
the grounds that the outcome was unreasonable.

17.10 Review Stage (Stage Three)
1.

The complainant may request a review of the decision on the following
grounds only:
•

That the procedures were not followed properly.

•

That the decision maker(s) reached an unreasonable decision.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Complaints Procedure: page 15 of 20

•

That the complainant has new material evidence that they were unable, for
valid reasons, to provide earlier in the process.

•

That there is bias or reasonable perception of bias during the procedure.

Any such request must be submitted in writing to the Academic Standards
Officer, within ten working days of the date of the letter communicating the
decision.
2.

The Academic Standards Officer (or nominee) will refer the challenge to an
appropriately qualified and experienced senior member of staff, from the roster
of Student Casework practitioners approved by the Academic Registrar, who
has had no involvement with the student or the complaint. The challenge will
be copied to University staff for information only, and no response from them
will be sought or anticipated at this stage.

3.

If valid grounds for doing so are identified, the Academic Standards Officer (or
nominee) will convene another Complaints Panel under the formal stage of
these procedures. This will be convened with a different membership to
ensure objectivity. This rehearing of the complaint will be final and there will be
no further opportunity to request a review. Considering this, the University will
ensure that the outcome of the rehearing is no less favourable to the
complainant than that of the original hearing. The decision letter issued to the
complainant following the rehearing will also serve as a Completion of
Procedures Letter.

4.

If valid grounds are not identified, the Academic Standards Officer (or
nominee) will advise the complainant that the University’s internal complaints
procedures have been exhausted and issue a Completion of Procedures
Letter accordingly (as per Section 17.11 of this Framework).

5.

The review stage will normally be concluded within fifteen working days of the
receipt of the challenge. If a delay is envisaged, the complainant will be
notified in writing before the end of the fifteen working day period. Where it is
agreed that another Complaints Panel should be convened under the formal
stage of these procedures, the timescales set out in Section 17.9 of this

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Complaints Procedure: page 16 of 20

Framework will apply and the processing time recorded for the complaint will
be reset accordingly.

17.11 Office of the Independent Adjudicator for Higher
Education
1.

If a complainant remains dissatisfied after the appropriate internal processes
have been exhausted, they can ask the University to issue a Completion of
Procedures letter in order for the Office of the Independent Adjudicator for
Higher Education (OIA) to review their complaint.

2.

The University must issue a Completion of Procedures letter in order for the
OIA to review a complaint. A Completion of Procedures letter will be issued
automatically where valid grounds for re-hearing the complaint are not found
at the review stage, following a rehearing of the complaint, and otherwise on
request. If a Completion of Procedures letter is issued before the review stage
has been conducted, the letter will make it clear that the student has not
completed the University’s internal processes.

3.

All requests for review must be made to the OIA within twelve months of the
date of issue of a Completion of Procedures letter. For full details please
contact http://www.oiahe.org.uk.

4.

This provision does not apply to applicants (i.e. non-registered students), as
the Office of the Independent Adjudicator (OIA) is unable to review such cases
— unless the applicant is a former student seeking re-admission and the
complaint relates directly to their previous period of study at the University.

17.12 Annual Report
The Academic Standards Officer submits an annual report on student
casework to Senate, detailing (anonymously) general matters or issues arising
from recent complaints. Additional reports are also submitted to the Finance
and Resources Committee of the Board of Governors on a regular basis.
Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Complaints Procedure: page 17 of 20

Senate will forward recommendations to other relevant University committees
so that broad concerns can be shared, and appropriate action taken. In
addition, the Academic Standards Officer will collate and present anonymised
monitoring information regarding complaints to Senate at appropriate intervals.

17.13 Procedures at Partner Organisations
1.

In accordance with the expectations set out in the UK Quality Code For Higher
Education and the University’s Collaborative Provision Regulations and
Procedures, all students registered for the University’s awards have the
ultimate right to complain to the University, irrespective of where they are
studying. This right of complaint, however, is not absolute and is subject to the
precise wording of the partnership agreement.

2.

The partner organisation, accordingly, should ensure that clear information
and guidance regarding formal complaints is made available to all students
registered for the University’s awards. This should include clear information
about the sequence of processes involved and make clear the channels
through which dissatisfied students can contact the University directly.

3.

Trainees who are undertaking placements at partner organisations and who
wish to complain should contact their Personal Development Tutor and/or
Programme (Area) Leader in the first instance, so that they can be directed as
appropriate. A complaint direct to the University rather than to the placement
provider will normally be appropriate.

4.

Once the internal procedures of the partner organisation have been fully
exhausted, if invoked, students who wish to take their case to the University
for review should ask the Academic Standards Officer in writing if they are
eligible to do so. The complainant may request a review of the decision on the
following grounds only:
•

That the procedures were not followed properly.

•

That the decision maker(s) reached an unreasonable decision.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Complaints Procedure: page 18 of 20

•

That the student has new material evidence that they were unable, for valid
reasons, to provide earlier in the process.

•
5.

That there is bias or reasonable perception of bias during the procedure.

If a case is eligible for review, the Academic Standards Officer (or nominee)
will refer the challenge to an appropriately qualified and experienced senior
member of academic staff, from the roster of Student Casework practitioners
approved by the Academic Registrar, who has no involvement with the
partnership. If the challenge is upheld, the case will be referred to the partner
organisation to be reheard under its own procedures. Otherwise, the
University will not refer the case back to the partner organisation to be reheard
and the Academic Standards Officer (or nominee) will advise the student
accordingly. This will include advice regarding a student’s further right of
complaint to the Office of the Independent Adjudicator (OIA) (as per Section
17.11 of this Framework). The review stage will normally be concluded within
fifteen working days of the receipt of the request. If a delay is envisaged, the
complainant will be notified in writing before the end of the fifteen working day
period.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Complaints Procedure: page 19 of 20

Document Title

Plymouth Marjon University Student
Regulations Framework – Section 17
Complaints Procedure

Document Reference

L:\Student Regulations Framework\Student
Regulations Framework 2025-26

Version

3.16

Issuing Authority

Senate

Custodian

Academic Standards Officer

Document Date

16th October 2009

Last Amended

16th July 2025

Sensitivity

Unclassified

Circulation

Website

Effective from

September 2025

Review Date

Ongoing

Effective until

September 2026

History

Updated annually and subject to routine ongoing
revision, informed by the Good Practice
Framework.

Equality Impact Assessment

Preliminary EIA conducted for SRF, December
2010. Updated Equality Analysis Form to be
submitted.

Plymouth Marjon University SRF 2025-26 Complaints Procedure: page 20 of 20
