.

Royal
f5w Agricultural
1V1. University

D
Code of Practice:
Assessment
Academic Governance Approval
Academic Quality and Standards Committee (AQSC)

Academic Sponsor
Pro Vice-Chancellor (Academic Planning & Resources)

Professional Services Owner
Head of Academic Quality
Head of Registry

Date Approved
AQSC 23 May 2022
AQSC 03 July 2024
AQSC Updates 28 May 2025

July 2025 (32)

Page 1 of 35

D – Assessment

Contents
1.

Aims, Scope and Regulations

4

1.1 Aims
1.2 Scope
1.3 Regulations
2.

Assessment Types and Components

6

2.1 Assessment types
2.2 Word counts and Assessment weighting
2.3 Assessment components
3.

Assessment Setting and Scrutiny

17

3.1 Summative assessment
3.2 Formative assessment
3.3 Generative Artificial Intelligence (GenAI)
3.4 Assessment submission dates
3.5 Assessment details
3.6 Assessment scrutiny
3.7 Release of assessment information to students
4.

Assessment Submission

19

4.1 Assessment submission
4.2 Assessment cover sheet and declarations
4.3 Late submission
4.4 Non-submission
4.5 Exceptional circumstances
4.6 Extensions
4.7 Deferrals
4.8 Resits
5.

Assessment Marking and Moderation

23

6.

Assessment Feedback and Feedforward

24

7.

Return and Recording of Marks

25

Page 2 of 35

D – Assessment

Appendix 1

Formative Assessment Guidance

Appendix 2

Learning, Teaching and Assessment support for Disabled &
Neurodivergent Students

Page 3 of 35

D – Assessment

1. Aims and Scope and Regulations
1.1 Aims
The Code of Practice - Assessment has been prepared to support the learning,
teaching and assessment practices at the Royal Agricultural University thus
ensuring the alignment between teaching strategies, intended learning outcomes,
assessment components and assessment criteria. Assessments are integral to
learning and teaching and should develop students’ knowledge and
understanding, while measuring attainment.
1.2 Scope
The Code of Practice sets out the principles for the design, communication and
implementation of effective assessment and feedback practices at the University.
It applies to all credit-bearing taught programmes at undergraduate and
postgraduate levels of study.
The Code of Practice should be read in conjunction with the Academic
Regulations for Taught Programmes, the QAA Advice and Guidance: Course
Design and Development (Nov 2018) and the QAA Advice and Guidance:
Assessment (November 2018).
The aim of the Code of Practice is to ensure the University meets the obligations
and expectations placed on it by its students, staff and external regulators by:
•

Ensuring assessment methods and criteria are aligned to learning
outcomes and teaching activities

•

Assessment is reliable, consistent, fair and valid

•

Assessment design is approached holistically

•

Assessment is inclusive and equitable

•

Assessment is explicit and transparent

•

Assessment feedback is purposeful and supports the learning process

•

Assessment is timely, efficient and manageable

•

Students are supported and prepared for assessments

•

Assessment encourages academic integrity

This Code of Practice applies to the following awards from the Royal Agricultural
University taught at its campuses in Cirencester and Swindon, as well as its Joint
Institute for Advanced Agritechnology at Qingdao Agricultural University (RAU at
QAU) Joint Institute; franchised and validated provision taught at providers in the
UK and international:
•

Level 4 Certificates

•

Level 5 Diplomas

•

Level 6 Honours
Page 4 of 35

D – Assessment

•

Level 7 Masters

•

Level 8 Doctoral

1.3 Regulations
The following Office for Students Conditions of Registration are relevant to this Code of
Practice:
B1

The provider must ensure that the students registered on each higher education
course receive a high- quality academic experience which includes but is not limited to
ensuring that each course:
a) is up-to-date;
b) provides educational challenge;
c) is coherent;
d) is effectively delivered; and
e) as appropriate to the subject matter of the course, requires students to develop
relevant skills.

B2

The provider must take all reasonable steps to ensure students receive resources and
support to ensure a high-quality academic experience for those students, and those
students succeed in and beyond higher education; and that effective engagement which
each cohort of students takes place.

B4

The provider must ensure that qualifications awarded to students hold their value at
the point of qualification and over time, in line with sector recognised standards. The
provider must ensure that
a) students are assessed effectively;
b) each assessment is valid and reliable;
c) academic regulations are designed to ensure that relevant awards are credible;
d) academic regulations are designed to ensure the effective assessment of technical
proficiency in the English language in a way which appropriately reflects the level and
content of the course;
e) relevant awards granted to students are credible at the point of being granted and
when compared to those granted previously.

B5

The provider must ensure that, in respect of any relevant awards granted to students who
complete a higher education course provided by, or on behalf of, the provider (whether or
not the provider is the awarding body):
a) and standards set appropriately reflect any applicable sector-recognised standards;
b) awards are only granted to students whose knowledge and skills appropriately
reflect any applicable sector-recognised standards.

Page 5 of 35

D – Assessment

2. Assessment Types and Components
2.1 Assessment types

Programmes at the Royal Agricultural University are assessed through the use of
different assessment methods across modules of study. Assessments are
underpinned by the QAA UK Quality Code for Higher Education (June 2024) and as
set out under Principle 11 – Teaching, learning and assessment:
Providers facilitate a collaborative and inclusive approach that enables students to
have a high-quality learning experience and to progress through their studies. All
students are supported to develop and demonstrate academic and professional skills
and competencies. Assessment employs a variety of methods, embodying the values
of academic integrity, producing outcomes that are comparable across the UK and
recognised globally.
Key Practices
Learning and assessment at all levels is informed by research and/or scholarship. Teaching,
learning and assessment align to ensure students can demonstrate their achievements, reflect
on and reinforce their prior learning, skills and knowledge, and fulfil their potential.
a. Students are given clear information about the intended modular and/or programme
learning outcomes and the purpose of assessment and are enabled to use
feedback/feedforward to support further learning.
b. Staff involved in facilitating learning and supervising research are appropriately
qualified and supported to enhance their teaching and supervisory practice. Research
degrees are delivered in supportive environments that are conducive to learning and
research.
c. Students are enabled and encouraged to take responsibility for their own learning and
to take an active role in shaping and enhancing the learning process. Providers offer
ongoing advice and guidance about academic integrity to ensure that students and
staff understand what is expected of them.
d. As students move through their learning journey, they are given the opportunity and
support to transition effectively between academic levels, further study and
employment. Providers enable students to recognise the progression they have made
and steps they need to take to achieve their potential.
e. Providers design assessments that test appropriate learning outcomes and are fair,
reliable, accessible, authentic and inclusive. Where applicable, and sustainable,
students are offered different options for undertaking assessments to promote
accessibility and inclusion.
f.

Providers establish coherent approaches to technologies that impact teaching, learning
and assessment (such as Generative Artificial Intelligence). These approaches are
clearly communicated to staff and students, include how they are utilised and define
misuse of such technologies.
Page 6 of 35

D – Assessment

g. Providers offer advice and guidance about academic integrity to ensure that students
and staff understand what is expected of them throughout the learning journey. The
advice is kept current.
Module learning outcomes are aligned to programme learning outcomes. Assessments within
programmes and courses apply a range of delivery methods and are utilised where
appropriate to evidence learning. Individual assessments should be linked to the RAU
Graduate Framework and the four employability domains which are Professional Approach,
Innovative Business Thinker, Sustainable and Environmental Mindset and Technically Skilled.
The goal is to maximise students’ learning potential leading to positive outcomes. Module and
programme learning outcomes are to be assessed effectively and rigorously through the use
of different assessment methods which allows for different skills to be assessed.
All assessments are defined within one of four broad assessment types which are;
•
•
•
•

Practical
Coursework
Written Exam
Research

Practical
Practical assessments are delivered live by students at a set time. Academic integrity is
maintained through direct observation by one or more assessors. Practical assessments do not
need to result in the creation of a tangible product by the student and marking is therefore
usually conducted synchronously with the assessment. Marking can take place later where an
audio-visual recording of the assessment is made.
Coursework
Coursework assessments are produced by students over a period, without monitoring.
Academic integrity is maintained retrospectively, through similarity analysis and academic
scrutiny. Coursework assessment is most often written, but not exclusively so, and includes
the production of audio and/or visual content. A coursework assessment must result in the
creation of a tangible product (physical or digital) by the student.
Written Exam
Written exams are written assessments that are attempted by all students simultaneously.
Academic integrity is maintained through monitoring either in-person (via invigilation) or
online (via proctoring). Written exams are structured to include one or more of the following
question types:
•
•
•
•

Multiple choice questions
Mathematical/statistical questions
Short answer questions
Long answer questions (including essay-style questions)

Research

Page 7 of 35

D – Assessment

Research assessments seek to evaluate the robustness and transparency of the underpinning
original research and data collection that has been undertaken by the student to support
their original conclusions.
2.2 Word counts and Assessment weighting
Word counts indicate the length of an assessment component and module specifications
and assessment briefs should state a minimum and/or maximum word count. Assessment
briefs must provide details of any penalties that will apply to work where word counts are
under or over that specified. Normally, work above the indicated word count will not be
considered.
The word count normally applies to the main body of text, including tables within the main
text. Abstracts, acknowledgements, contents, executive summaries, references,
bibliographies, appendices are excluded from the word count but may be submitted as
required by the individual assignment.
Assessment components that require different forms of submission, including but not limited
to, subject specific exercises, skills portfolios, audio visual media, presentations, etc are
required to specify the number of submission parts. For example, the expectation for a
presentation is 10 slides.
Examinations and other types of assessment, such as presentations, are quantified with a
time limit, e.g. 2 hours written exam or 10-minute presentation.
Assessment weightings are used when an assessment has more than one component that
are not of equal importance or value to the overall result. For example, if an assessment
consisted of producing an academic poster and presenting it for peer review, the content may
be assessed by the tutor for 60% of the overall mark, whilst the peer review component may
only contribute 40%. Weightings may also be used for assessing group work, to define a
relative weighting to individual contribution. Assessment briefs must specify the weighting for
different components and how they will be assessed. All students participating in group work
must be awarded an individual mark.
Arrangements for assessment setting, completion, marking, moderation and alternative
assessments are different for each type of assessment.
Module learning outcomes should not normally be summatively assessed more than once
unless appropriate.
Typical summative assessments for a 20-credit module could be:
•
A single, individual 4,000-word assessment (100%)
•
An individual assessment of 2,500 words (50%) plus a 1-hour examination (50%)
•
A group (2 to 4 students) presentation of 30 minutes (30%) plus a 3,000 word
assessment (70%)
•
Pass/Fail assessments are classified as Practicals and have no weighting (write
Pass/Fail)
Typical summative assessments for a 15-credit module could be:
•
A single, individual 3,000-word assessment (100%)
Page 8 of 35

D – Assessment

•
•
•

An individual assessment of 1,500 words (50%) plus a 1-hour examination (50%)
A group (2 to 4 students) presentation of 30 minutes (30%) plus a 2,000 word
assessment (70%)
Pass/Fail assessments are classified as Practicals and have no weighting (write
Pass/Fail)

2.3 Assessment Components
The assessment components for each module are detailed in the Module Templates for the
relevant module.
Changes to module specifications must be approved as outlined in the Programme Design
and Development Code of Practice.
When defining assessment components, a balance must be found between setting clear
expectations for students about what is expected, and providing sufficient flexibility for
academic staff to develop the assessment brief and ensure the assessment remains relevant
within the context of the subject area.
To achieve this balance, the following assessment component descriptions and definitions
should be used when describing assessment components on the module template.
Innovation in the design of assessment components is encouraged. Where a proposed
assessment does not fall within the current definitions, the module leader should speak to
Academic Quality.
The current assessment brief template can be found in the Academic Staff Centre section on
Gateway.

The below word counts, with the exception of the dissertation, and time limits are
suggestions only and depend on other assessment components in the same module.
*Quercus code
ASSESSMENT TYPE: Practical

COMPONENT

Peer review

*PEER
REVIEW
Presentation

*PRESENTAT
ION
Role-play

QUANTIFICATION

EXAMPLE
(i.e. what is on the
module spec)

ASSESSMENT FOCUS

Not
applicable

Peer review

Academic
Scientific
Professional

Time limit
OR
Slide limit

Presentation (5
minutes) OR
Presentation (6
slides)

Academic
Scientific
Professional

Time limit

Role-play (10

Professional

DESCRIPTION

An individual peer review
of a practical assessment
by other students, for
example of a
presentation.
A live presentation
delivered by the student,
in-person or virtually.
(see ‘audio visual media’
for presentations which
are pre-recorded)
A timed role-play
Page 9 of 35

D – Assessment

minutes)

*ROLE PLAY

Skills
observation

*SKILLS
OBSERVATIO
N

Time limit
OR
Number of
skills

Skills observation
(10 minutes) OR
Skills observation (5
skills)

Scientific
Professional

between two or more
students, or between a
student and a third-party
participant. The
participant must not be
the assessor.
In person observation of
a student demonstrating
a skill or technique for
example wildlife
handling, or
demonstration of a
laboratory technique.

ASSESSMENT TYPE: Coursework
EXAMPLE
(i.e. what is on the
module spec)

COMPONENT

QUANTIFIC
ATION

Academic
poster

Word
count

Academic poster
(500 words) OR
Academic Poster

Academic

150 – 250
words per
source

The annotation gives
information about
the relevance and
quality of the
sources students
cited through a 150250 word description
or interpretation of
the source.
Audio visual media
(5 minutes) OR
Video (6 slides)

Academic

Business plan (3000
words including
SWOT and data
analysis)

Academic
Professional

*ACAD
POSTER

Annotated
Bibliography

* ANN_BIB

Audio visual
media

*AUDIO-VIS
MEDIA
Business Plan

* Business
Plan

Time limit
OR
Slide limit

Word
count

ASSESSMENT FOCUS

Academic
Scientific
Professional

DESCRIPTION

A traditional academic
poster, presenting
academic information
through a combination of
visual imagery, charts
and text with
consideration for both
the content and layout of
the poster.
A list of the sources
including citatins that
students have used in
their research with brief
‘annotations’ (summary
or analysis) for each that
describe the sources’
content and summarise
its main argument.
An item of audio and/or
visual media including
videos, pre-recorded
presentations, podcasts
etc.
A document describing
the key financial and
organisational aspects of
a business with a focus
on the overall
organisation and not
specific activities. This
Page 10 of 35

D – Assessment

Case study
++

Word
count

Case study (2000
words)

Academic
Scientific
Professional

Word
count

Dissertation (BSc
12,000 words, MSc
15,000 words)

Academic

Word
count

Essay (1800 words)

Academic

Word
count

Grant application
(1000 words)

Academic

Marking
arrangeme
nt**

Group Presentation
(5 minutes,
individually marked)
OR
Group Professional
Practice Report
(2000 words)
Learning log (2000
words)

Academic
Scientific
Professional

*CASE
STUDY

Dissertation

*DISS

Essay

*ESSAY

Grant
application

*GRANT
APPL

Group Work

*GROUP
WORK

Learning log

(see end
of
document)
Word
count

Professional

document may be
required as part of
funding applications. Can
include SWOT, data and
risk analysis.
Can be undertaken
individually or as a
group assessment in the
form of a problem-based
inquiry approach
requiring identification of
potential solutions.
An extended piece of
structured writing
through which a student
demonstrates learning
gained from an in-depth
analysis or study of a
topic using either
primary or secondary
research techniques. A
dissertation is used as a
capstone assessment for
a degree programme.
A piece of structured
writing through which a
student presents an
explanation, argument or
analysis regarding a
specific question or topic
using secondary
research, or critical
analysis.
Students are required to
use real/adapted
versions of different
grant application forms
to plan a research
project. This could be
assessed using the
published criteria as a
basis for the marking
criteria
Any item of assessment
where students work
collaboratively. All
students participating
in group work must
be awarded an
individual mark.
List of activities,
competencies and
Page 11 of 35

D – Assessment

*LEARNING
LOG
Literature
review

Word
count

Literature Review
(2000 words)

Academic

Time limit

Online test (30
minutes)

Academic
Scientific
Professional

Word
count

Evidence of
documented skills,
qualification,
education and
training

Academic
Scientific
Professional

*LIT REVIEW

Online test

*ONLINE
TEST

Portfolio

*Portfolio

outcomes which students
check off during a period
of learning during
placement.
A piece of structured
writing through which a
student presents an
overview of academic
sources which provides a
description, summary
and critical evaluation of
these sources in relation
to the research problem
under investigation.
A timed, online quiz
which consists of one or
more questions including
multiple choice
questions, long answer
questions, short answer
questions or
statistical/mathematical
questions. The rubric for
an online test may be
similar in format to a
formal written exam but
online tests are not
invigilated. The test may
take place at a scheduled
time, or may be available
for students to complete
at any point during a
longer period of time;
once started the test
must be completed
within the time limit.
A purposeful collection of
student work that
exhibits the student’s
efforts, progress and
achievements in one or
more areas. The
collection must include
student participation in
selecting contents, the
criteria for selection and
materials that exemplify
skills, qualifications,
education, training and
experiences. This can
include an element of
self-reflection.
Page 12 of 35

D – Assessment

Problem
sheet

*PROB
SHEET

Professional
practice
report

Word
count OR
Question
type

Problem Sheet
(short answer
questions) OR
Problem Sheet (1000
words)

Academic
Scientific
Professional

Word
count

Professional Practice
Report (1000 words)

Professional

Word
count

Research Proposal
(1000 words)

Academic

Word
count

Research paper
(1500 words)

Academic

Word
count

Scientific Report
(2000 words)

Scientific

*PROF PRAC
REP
Research
proposal

*RESEARCH
PROP

Research
paper

*RES PAP

Scientific
report

*SCI REPORT

An assignment which
consists of one or more
questions including
multiple choice
questions, long answer
questions, short answer
questions or
statistical/mathematical
questions. The rubric for
a problem sheet may be
similar in format to a
formal written exam but
problem sheets are not
invigilated or scheduled.
Students are given a
defined period of time,
usually 1 or 2 weeks, to
complete the problem
sheet and submit their
answers.
A structured piece of
writing which imitates, or
directly replicates a
format which students
might expect to
undertake when working
in the relevant sector.
A piece of structured
writing in which a
student summarises a
proposed research
problem, setting out the
central question which
will be investigated with
reference to current
academic literature.
A piece of structured
writing, replicating the
format of an academic
journal, through which a
student demonstrates
learning gained from an
in-depth analysis or
study of a topic using
either primary or
secondary research
techniques.
A structured piece of
writing which follows the
format and style of a
Page 13 of 35

D – Assessment

Skills
portfolio

Number of
skills

Skills portfolio (6
skills)

Scientific
Professional practice

Varies –
seek
advice
from
Academic
Services

Subject specific
exercise (xxx)

Professional

*SKILLS
PORTFOLIO

Subject
specific
exercise

*SUBJ SPEC
EX

traditional scientific or
laboratory report.
A portfolio which
evidences a series of
skills, techniques or
behaviours this could be
presented as a physical
item, for example a
laboratory notebook, or
in a digital format, for
example a Moodle
Database.
An exercise which
imitates, or directly
replicates an activity
which students might
expect to undertake
when working in the
relevant sector but which
is not a structured
written report. Examples
include;
•
•
•
•
•
•

Textual visual
media

Word
count

Textual visual
media (800 words)

Academic
Scientific
Professional

Word
count

Written selfreflection (500
words)

Academic
Scientific
Professional

*TEXT VIS
MEDIA
Written selfreflection

*SELFREFLEC

Equine ration
exercises
Equine synthesis
tables
Coding exercises
Circuit design
exercises
Calculation
exercises
Species
identification

An item of textual and/or
visual media including
magazine articles,
posters leaflets,
infographics or press
releases.
A loosely structured, or
unstructured piece of
writing through which a
student reflects on their
own learning and
development with
regards to a specific
activity, for example an
individual assessment or
a placement.
Page 14 of 35

D – Assessment

ASSESSMENT TYPE: Exam

COMPONENT

QUANTIFIC
ATION

Written exam

Time limit

*WRITTEN
EXAM

EXAMPLE
(i.e. what is on the
module spec)

Written exam
(2 hours)

ASSESSMENT FOCUS

Academic
Scientific
Professional

DESCRIPTION

A formal, traditional,
examination which is
scheduled and invigilated
and consists of one or
more questions including
multiple choice
questions, long answer
questions, short answer
questions or
statistical/mathematical
questions

ASSESSMENT TYPE: Research

COMPONENT

Thesis

* THESIS

Viva Voce

* VIVA VOCE

QUANTIFIC
ATION

Word
count

There are
no rules
concerning
the length
of time a
viva will
take.
Examiners
have
discretion
to make it
as long or
as short as
they think
necessary.
Each
combinati
on of
thesis,
student

EXAMPLE
(i.e. what is on the
module spec)

PhD: 80,000 words
MPhil: 40,000 words
Excluding
appendices

ASSESSMENT FOCUS

Academic
Scientific
Professional

Academic
Scientific
Professional

DESCRIPTION

A concentrated piece of
original research which
explains the conclusion
that has been reached as
a result of undertaking
the research project.
Formal examination in
which a student answers
questions regarding their
thesis and research area.
Assessment can be
conducted by one or
more examiners and
allows examiners to:
• examine the
general field
within which the
thesis lies;
• discuss the thesis
in detail;
• explore the ideas
and the theories
proposed in the
thesis;
• clarify any points
of ambiguity; and
Page 15 of 35

D – Assessment

and
examiners
is unique.

•

satisfy
themselves that
the thesis is the
student’s own
work

**Assessing Group Work
All students participating in group work must be awarded an individual mark.
Academics must be able to explain how the mark was derived at in the event of an
academic misconduct investigation.
While group work provides students with an authentic and inclusive learning experience that
contributes to their graduate attributes, group work often creates problems where there is a
lack of clarity as to whether the process of working in a group is being assessed; the
coursework output; or both. Group work can be used to develop skills such as team-working,
collaboration, organisational and time management, all of which are important for future
employment. Assessments should be designed such that they are seen as inclusive and fair,
while allowing for the scaffolding of group tasks.
When using group work as assessment tool, module leaders should reflect on the rationale
for the appropriateness of how the group work is to be assessed, and what the alternative
assessment will be in the event of resits or deferrals.
To avoid student dissatisfaction, group work should be introduced by:
• Implementing group assessment guidelines that explain how the assessment
will meet the module learning outcomes, marking criteria and rubric. The guidance
should set out how participation in group activities will be evidenced and assessed;
and how marks will be balanced between individual and group effort.
• Determining the group membership, size and the process for forming the
group. Groups should be diverse and they should be encouraged to set up their own
plans for group work activities. Module leaders should set out how groups are being
supported in the event of problems outside of the groups control, e.g. sickness.
• Allowing time in scheduled teaching sessions to facilitate group work tasks,
e.g. idea generation; recording progress; provision of constructive feedback; reach
consensus for progress and actions.
• Providing tools to enable and facilitate the collaboration which can be used to
evidence progress; e.g. discussion group on the VLE; team meetings via chat groups;
formative submission of the group’s progress with the task; peer review on progress.
Assessing group work
The issue of fairness in marking group work is a common concern when establishing this type
of assessment. Typically, assessors may want to mark the produce of group work, as this
provides a reduced burden in the marking process. However, where there is a disparate
dedication of time and effort into group work amongst group members, this can lead to
animosity, where members may feel that they are carrying the burden of work for their peers
but being awarded the same marks (Boud and Falchikov, 2007).
At the RAU, all students participating in group work must be awarded an individual mark.
Group can be assessed either through:
Individual assessment
Assessing the product:
Page 16 of 35

D – Assessment

•

By allowing students to take a particular focus or role (through self-allocation or by
module leader allocation). This ensures that each student has an area of focus for the
completion of the overall coursework product and students will be marked on the
quality of their work in the whole product. Marks are awarded for individual
contributions which are evidenced by individual output and against the marking
criterial.

Assessing the process:
•

Students are provided with the assessment criterial and guidelines for how they
should keep track of the group work process. Students are awarded a portion of the
marks for the overall output of the group work and for individual components based
on their self-reflections and record keeping of the process. Marks awarded refer to the
group output against the assessment criteria and reflective reports such as selfreflections, meeting notes, presentations or work notes.

3. Assessment Setting and Scrutiny
3.1 Summative assessment
According to QAA “Summative assessment is used to indicate the extent of a learner’s
success in meeting the assessment criteria used to gauge the intended learning outcomes of
a module or programme” (QAA, 2018). It is the assessment of learning,often completed at
the end of a module, that is usually formal and produces the module mark that will be
recorded for each student.

3.2 Formative assessment
As well as summative assessments, modules should also provide formative assessment
opportunities. In comparison formative assessment focusses on “learning itself and (on)
providing a means by which progress can be made” (QAA, 2018). Formative assessment is
sometimes known as assessment for learning. There should be opportunities for formative
assessment throughout the module and formative assessment maybe informal (e.g. class
activities and discussion etc.) or more formal (self-assessed quizzes, reflective blogs, essays
etc.).

See Formative Assessment Guidance (Appendix 1) for further details.
3.3 Generative Artificial Intelligence (GenAI)
Automated content creation technologies are increasingly prevalent in everyday activities,
generating original content in various forms with minimal user input. OpenAI's ChatGPT is the
most well-known example, but other systems like Bing Chat, DALL.E, and Google Bard also
exist, with new products emerging frequently. These tools can create content for assessments
using minimal prompts, offering contextual (re)generation with various "voices" and the
ability to develop programs with multiple coding languages.
Page 17 of 35

D – Assessment

Further staff guidance on the capabilities and limitations of GenAI, as well as samples of the
use and embedding of GenAI into teaching practice, can be found on the staff pages of the
University Gateway.
3.4 Assessment submission dates
Module Leaders must liaise with Programme Leaders regarding the setting of assessment
submission dates to minimise the “bunching” of assessment work for both students and staff.
This includes submission dates for elective modules.
Where possible, submission deadlines for assessments on a Monday or Friday should be
avoided, as well as Bank Holidays.
Registry manages the schedule for the setting of examination papers and the running of
traditional (examination room based) examinations.
Academic Quality will liaise with module leaders to update the submission weeks on module
templates in late Spring each academic year so as to align submission weeks with the
teaching weeks of the forthcoming academic year.
3.5 Assessment details
All assessment tasks should be set using the RAU assessment template (see below) or the
RAU format for examinations. The assessment brief provides the details of the assessment
task requirements, namely; assessment length (words or time), detailed format of the
assessment/coursework (essay, case study, infographic, laboratory report etc.) and whether
the task is an individual or group task.
Where group work is included in the summative assessment of a module, group size should
be limited to a maximum of six students (smaller group sizes and paired assessments are
acceptable). Guidance should be provided in the module specification and assessment brief
on how the group is to be managed (particularly regarding the management of problems
within the group). Information must also be provided in the assessment brief on how marks
will be allocated to group members. Each student participating in group work must be
awarded an individual mark.
3.6 Assessment scrutiny
New assessments and examinations should be reviewed by a member of RAU academic staff
(who is not the person setting the assessment task) prior to the release of the assessment or
examination to students. Allocation of staff to modules for the purposes of assessment
scrutiny and moderation should be carried out by the Dean of Subject or Programme Leader.
Details of the assessment moderation for each module must be recorded using the RAU
Assessment Brief – Internal Moderation Form (Staff Centre on Gateway) and uploaded to the
External Examiner location on the relevant module Gateway page.
The scrutiny process ensures that assessments;
•

match the information on the Module template

•

are appropriate for the level of study
Page 18 of 35

D – Assessment

•

are expressed clearly

•

clearly present the marking criteria and allocation of marks for the assessment

•

include submission details (date of submission, location of submission portal etc.)

Module External Examiners are required, prior to examinations, to scrutinise examination
papers and make comments on their appropriateness for the subject area and level of study.

3.7 Release of assessment information to students
Summative assessments should, following internal scrutiny, be released to students to allow
sufficient time for students to address the assessment task. The generic assessment
information on the module Gateway page (type of assessment and submission date for each
assessment) must be completed a minimum of 2 weeks before the start of the
semester/module. Where possible, assessment briefs should be uploaded to the module
Gateway assessment page and made available to students at the start of the module.
Details on the assessment task, using the RAU Assessment Brief template, must be accurate
and shared with students in Week 1 via the module Gateway assessment page and discussing
it with students to help students to understand the marking criteria.
All assessments must be marked and internally moderated within the 20-day marking period
before marks are released to students.

4. Assessment Submission
4.1 Assessment submission
Submission deadlines for each assessment component are detailed in the Module template for
the relevant module. Changes to module templates must be approved as outlined in the Code
of Practice - Programme Design and Development.
Assessments must be submitted by the deadline.
Where assessment submission takes place via Turnitin, an assessment will not be considered
‘submitted’ unless the student has received a submission receipt.
4.2 Assessment cover sheet
Students are required to complete an Assessment Cover Sheet (available on Gateway) when
submitting their work. On the cover sheet they are asked to complete two declarations:
•

whether they have/have not an agreed Reasonable Adjustment Plan (RAP)

•

whether they have/have not used Generative Artificial Intelligence tools

4.3 Late Submission

Page 19 of 35

D – Assessment

Assessments that are submitted after the deadline must be marked as normal, to ensure
students receive proper feedback and in case an extension has been granted. However, the
mark entered on Quercus must reflect any cap for missing the deadline.
Where an assessment is submitted within 5 working days of the deadline the academic
responsible for marking should update the assessment status in Quercus to “late – capped at
40” and enter a gross mark of “40” or lower if the uncapped mark would be below 40. The
uncapped mark should be added as a note on the assessment (e.g. “uncapped mark =
67%”).
Assessments that are submitted more than 5 working days after the deadline should be
entered on Quercus as a gross mark of “0” and will be treated as a non-submission.
Assessments granted an extension may have their full mark entered on Quercus, so long as
submission was within the new deadline, or capped accordingly after that deadline.

4.4 Non-submission
Assessments that are not submitted will receive a mark of 0%.
Where an assessment is not submitted the academic responsible for marking should update
the assessment status in Quercus to “Out of time 0 (zero) marks” and enter a gross mark of
“0”.
4.5 Exceptional circumstances
Where there are exceptional circumstances, students can submit a request for an extension
(coursework only) or a deferral via the Student Portal.

4.6 Extensions
Extensions can only be approved for coursework assessments.
Where an extension is approved the assessment submission will be extended by 10 working
days. The extension does not change the University’s policy regarding late-submission and
non-submission (above).
Coursework submitted by an approved extension deadline will be marked as normal and is
therefore uncapped.

4.7 Deferrals
Deferrals can be approved for any assessment (exams, coursework and practical
assessments).
Deferrals will be approved for coursework, only where the circumstances are likely to extend
beyond 10 working days.

Page 20 of 35

D – Assessment

Where a deferral is approved the assessment will be delayed until the relevant deferral
deadline, as set in the Academic Calendar.
Deferred assessments will be marked as normal and are therefore uncapped, so a new
assessment brief, for coursework and exams, requiring a new, original piece of work, should
be used to avoid any unfair advantage.
Definition of Exceptional Circumstances
Exceptional circumstances are defined as circumstances which are;
•
•
•

Unavoidable – the circumstances are beyond the student’s control
Unforeseen – the circumstances arose suddenly and could not have been predicted
Serious – the circumstances are having a significant impact on the student’s learning
experience
Applications for extensions and deferrals will only be approved where it is demonstrated that
the circumstances meet all three criteria.
Examples of exceptional circumstances may include;
•
•
•
•
•

Serious short-term illness or injury, usually requiring medical attention from a GP or
other doctor
Temporary, acute worsening of a long-term disability, including mental health
condition
Death of a close relative/friend
Victim of serious crime
Participation in national/international sporting or cultural events

Examples of circumstances which are not considered exceptional may include;
•
•
•
•

Minor illnesses
Unawareness of assessment dates and deadlines
Transport difficulties
Holidays

Documentary evidence
Applications for extensions and deferrals will only be approved where independent
documentary evidence is provided. The exact type of evidence will vary depending on the
circumstances.
Examples of acceptable independent documentary evidence may include;
•
•
•
•
•

A medical certificate authorised by a GMC registered doctor
A hospital admission report or appointment letter
A birth certificate, or death certificate issued by an official Registrar
A letter from a BACP accredited therapist
A police crime report and incident number

Process for requesting and approving extensions and deferrals
Page 21 of 35

D – Assessment

Requests for extensions or deferrals must be made through the Student portal. Requests
must be made by the student and must be submitted before the assessment deadline.
Requests that are submitted after the assessment deadline will be rejected.
Documentary evidence must be submitted via email to extensions@rau.ac.uk as soon as
possible. Where documentary evidence is not provided the request will be rejected.
Requests will be considered against the criteria for exceptional circumstances (above). Where
there is clear precedent for a request to be accepted or rejected then the decision will be
made by an Officer in the Registry Team. Where there is no clear precedent, or the
circumstances of a case are more complex, the case will be reviewed and a judgement will be
made by the Director of Academic Services.
Where an extension request is approved, the Registry Team will update the assessment
status in Quercus to “Extension” and add a note on the assessment. Academic Services will
communicate the outcome to the student and module leader.
Where a deferral request is approved, the Registry Team will update the assessment status in
Quercus to “deferred” and add a note on the assessment. Academic Services will
communicate the outcome to the student and module leader.
Where an extension or deferral request is rejected, the Registry Team will add a note to the
main student record. The Registry Team will communicate the outcome to the student and
module leader.
Where a request for an extension or deferral cannot yet be considered, as the documentary
evidence has not yet been submitted, the academic responsible for marking the assessment
should mark the assessment as normal, under the University’s policy for late-submission or
non-submission as appropriate. If an extension or deferral is subsequently approved this will
be updated by the Registry Team.
Students requesting further extensions to a module that has already been granted an
extension will not be permitted.
Decisions made regarding exceptional circumstances are final. This does not affect a student’s
ability to submit an academic appeal following publication of their results.

4.8 Resits (previously Referrals)
If students did not submit the required assessment, submitted it more than 5 working days
after the deadline, or received a score below 40% for their first sitting, they would normally
be granted a resit and repeat the assessment without reattending the module’s teaching
elements. Resits are capped at 40%, or the relevant adjusted weighting if only part of the
assessment is repeated. Unless there was a specific unseen element to the assessment that
would give an unfair advantage if taken later than other students, resits should be set to the
same assessment brief as the original.
Extensions are not permitted for resit submissions under any circumstances. The 5 working
day grace period for late submissions does not apply to resit assessment deadlines.
For undergraduate programmes, including Foundation Degrees, the number of permissible
resits will be limited to 50% of the student’s total registered module credits in any academic
Page 22 of 35

D – Assessment

year, which will be over and above any resit credits relating to a work-based learning or
placement module.
For postgraduate programmes, the maximum number of permissible resits will be 50% of the
student’s total registered module credits of the taught programme in any academic year, with
the Master’s dissertation, agreed equivalent research-based project or combination of a
research methods module and a Masters dissertation or agreed equivalent research-based
project being considered independently of the taught module requirements.
For students studying on a part-time basis, the maximum number of permissible resits will be
restricted to 50% of registered module credits or a maximum of 30 module credits, whichever
is the greater, subject to a maximum of 60 credits in any one level.

5. Assessment Marking and Moderation
Assessments must be marked in accordance with guidance provided in the RAU Regulations
for Taught Programmes and in accordance with any additional marking criteria and
information on mark allocation provided in the assessment brief. The standard form of
marking is single marking plus internal sample moderation, some modules (e.g. dissertations)
may be double marked.
The timeframe for marking, including internal moderation, is 20 days.
It is the responsibility of the Module Leader to mark, or where there is more than one marker,
manage the marking of assessments. Markers should avoid using borderline marks (those
ending in a “9”) for assessments where the module has a single summative assessment.
Where a module is assessed using two summative assessments composite marks ending in a
“9” should be avoided if possible.
Markers should review the Turnitin similarity scores of assessments submitted online as part
of the marking process and should provide feedback comments where the similarity score is
higher than 20% (i.e. is the 20% similarity score due to high use of quotes/references and
therefore not an indicator of possible plagiarism or does the assessment require further
investigation – see student misconduct policy).
Moderation of a sample of the assessment must be completed before release of the marked
work to the students.
The moderation of assessment marks must be completed for module assessments in
accordance with RAU regulations and should cover all assessment components of a module
and should span the full range of marks awarded. Module Leaders are responsible for making
a sample of marked work available to the Moderator (usually via Gateway) in time for the
marks to be moderated before they are released to students. The work samples and the
marks awarded should be recorded on an internal moderation form that should accompany
the sample to the moderator.
Academic staff should note that the main aim of moderation is to provide assurance that
module assessment marking criteria, the marks across the full set of assessment tasks for the
module and the academic standards of the award have been applied correctly. “It is not
about making changes to an individual’s marks” (QAA, 2018).
Page 23 of 35

D – Assessment

The Moderator and Module leader must complete the Module Assessment Moderation Form
for all module assessments and upload it to the External Examiner location on the module
Gateway page. The current Module Assessment Moderation Form can be found in the
Academic Staff Centre section on Gateway.
The External Examiner will review the module marking process and the marks awarded and
communicate any comments to the Module Leader and Programme Manager via the Module
Boards and the External Examiner Report. Further information on the role of the external
examiner is available via the External Examiner Pages on Gateway and the Code of Practice
E: External Examiners.
Procedures for Double Marking
Where a single piece of assessment is presented for the achievement of 30-credits or more,
and marked by one individual, such as an undergraduate or postgraduate dissertation, the
work should be double marked. The second marker should assess the work independently
without sight of the mark or feedback from the first marker. The two markers will then agree
an appropriate final mark for submission to the examination board.
Where first and second markers cannot agree a final mark, a third marker will be employed
on the same basis as the second marker and with both the first and second marker they
shall determine a final mark to be presented to the Programme Board through discussion. It
is the responsibility of the University to ensure all cases of disagreement on marks are
resolved internally prior to the submission of sample assessments to an External Examiner.
However, in particularly difficult cases it is appropriate to involve the External Examiner as
anadjudicator. This should be conducted in advance of any examination board suchthat a
final mark is always presented.

6. Assessment Feedback and Feedforward
Assessing student learning outcomes: Assessment, feedback and feedforward must be based
on the module learning outcomes (LOs) and key terminology used from LOs in feedback/
feedforward to students to justify the grade awarded. Feedback and feedforward should be
high quality, constructive and framed positively and sensitively to enhance students’ future
learning, motivation, success and satisfaction.
Summative assessment feedback should be provided within 20 working days of submission
and should identify areas of strength within the submission and areas for further
improvement. This 20-day period includes the time required for moderation.
As a minimum, assessment feedback to students should include direct reference to the RAU
Marking Criteria for the relevant level of study plus at least one form of qualitative feedback
that provides students with “feed-forward” comments designed to help them improve future
submissions. For example, work submitted via Turnitin could be marked using rubrics linked
to RAU Marking Criteria plus either qualitative summary text, qualitative comments within the
assessment text or recorded feedback comments (all possible via Turnitin).
Traditional examinations (those taking place in an examination room) do not require formal
written feedback.
To note: the marking criteria have been updated for September 2024 onwards.
Page 24 of 35

D – Assessment

7. Return and Recording of Marks
For all online assessment submissions, the Module Leader is responsible for ensuring that the
assessment submission portal (e.g. Turnitin, Moodle etc.) is set up to release marks and
feedback to students by the required time and date. For assessments that are not submitted
online (i.e. class-based presentations) marks should be released to students via Quercus by
the required time and date.
Marks should not be released to students until they have been moderated. Marks and
feedback should normally be released to students within 20 working days of the assessment
submission date.
Moderated marks must be uploaded to Quercus by the dates provided by Registry.
Information on accessing and uploading information to Quercus is available on the Academic
Staff Centre Pages on Gateway.
In addition, the following staff guides can be found on the Staff Centre pages on Gateway:
•

Frequently asked questions: Marking and Feedback

•

Frequently asked questions: Assessment and Examinations

Page 25 of 35

D – Assessment

Appendix 1: Formative Assessment Guidance
The following guidance is based on the Quality Assurance Agency (QAA) UK Quality Code –
Advance and Guidance (Assessments) (November 2018)
https://www.qaa.ac.uk/the-quality-code/advice-and-guidance
In accordance with QAA terminology, formative assessment is developmental in nature and
assists students with their learning and reflective practice through the provision of ongoing
feedback. It allows tutors to monitor student learning and put in place intervention practices
if required. Formative assessment refers to a range of both formal and informal assessment
procedures conducted during the learning process. They enable and support modification to
both teaching and learning activities and to improve student attainment (Crooks, 2001).
Formative assessment, when designed well, assists students with learning and guides them
towards their summative assessment. It enables students to identity their strengths and
weaknesses, enables them to manage their learning in a structured manner. At the same
time, it provides tutors and the university with information about the areas students are
struggling with so that support can be put in place.
Formative assessment can be tutor led, peer or self-assessment. Formative assessments are
part of classroom activities and usually carry no grade, which in some instances may
discourage the students from doing the task or fully engaging with it. The activities can be
used to assess whether learning occurs and allows for teaching methods and resources to be
adapted or changed if required.
Developing formative assessment
Formative assessment should be constructively aligned with learning outcomes (Biggs and
Tang, 2007). It should be explained to students what formative assessments are and how
they will benefit them to achieve their summative assessments through the module learning
outcomes.
An over-reliance on summative assessment at the conclusion of an element of study gives
students a grade, but does not provide them with enough feedback that will help them
develop and improve before they reach the end of the module/programme. Therefore,
achieving a balance between formative and summative assessments is important, although
one that students don't always fully grasp and/or take seriously. Formative assessments
provide an effective and risk-free environment in which students can learn and experiment.
They are also suitable for peer reviews.
In addition:
•
Use different formative assessments for different module content to keep students
engaged;
•
Explain how formative assessment lead students to their summative assessment;
•
Provide students with feedback on their formative assessment and feedforward on
how
they can develop further to fill gaps in knowledge and skills;
•
Use marking criteria and rubrics consistently;
•
For summative assessments, ensure feedback aligns with the grades given.

Page 26 of 35

D – Assessment

Samples of formative assessment:
•
Short online quizzes at the end of class
•
One-minute reflective questions/papers (pose a question at the beginning of class and
students have one minute at the end to write their answer)
•
Group or pair discussions
•
Draft essay reviews by tutors or peers
•
Peer reviewed research proposals
•
Student marking activities where students use the module marking rubric to mark
their
own or peer work
•
Concept maps
•
Compare and contrast two components of what is being learnt to help them
demonstrate
knowledge and understanding
•
Elevator pitch
To engage students in formative assessment:
•
that

•

•

Clearly explain the rationale behind formative assessment – make it clear to students
through engaging with formative tasks they get to gain experience with their
assessments, risk-free, and can develop far stronger skills in order to obtain better
grades in the summative assessments.
Create a link between summative and formative assessment – design formative
assessments in such a way that they contribute to the summative task. This lowers
the workload on the students and provides them with necessary feedback to improve
their final performance. An example of such assessment is producing an essay plan, a
structure of a literature review, part of the essay or bibliography.
Lower the number of summative assessments and increase the number of formative
assessments – yet do not allow one single summative assessment to carry too much
weight in the final grade.

References
Crooks, T.J. (2001). The validity of formative assessments: Paper for the annual conference
of the British Educational Research Association, Leeds, UK
Biggs, J. & Tang, C (2011). Teaching for quality learning at university: What the student
does.

Page 27 of 35

D – Assessment

Appendix 2: Learning, Teaching and Assessment support for
Disabled & Neurodivergent Students
The definition of "disability" under the Equality Act 2010 is broad, encompassing any physical
or mental impairment that has a substantial and long-term adverse effect on a person's
ability to carry out normal day-to-day activities.
In addition to the university’s legal obligation to make reasonable adjustments, the university
also needs to refer to the Public Sector Equality Duty (PSED) when making decisions. The
PSED means that the university must actively consider how decisions, policies and the design
of courses and programmes affect people who are protected under the Equality Act.
Guidance on meeting the equality duty in policy and decision-making is available from the
Equality & Human Rights Commission: Meeting the Equality Duty in Policy and DecisionMaking.
Background information: Definition of a Specific Learning Difficulty (SpLD)
Whilst Reasonable Adjustment Plans (RAPs) are not exclusively for students who have a
specific learning difficulty, this nonetheless will most likely constitute the largest number of
students to whom the adjustment applies.
The term Specific Learning Difficulty (SpLD) can refer to a range of conditions, the most
prevalent being Dyslexia. Other conditions that may occur either in isolation or in coexistence with Dyslexia are Dyspraxia, Scotopic Sensitivity (also known as visual stress
or Irlen Syndrome) and Dyscalculia.
Dyslexia can be defined as an unexpected and variable difficulty in acquiring proficiency in
reading, spelling and composing written information. It may be associated with other specific
difficulties such as weaknesses in certain aspects of cognitive functioning such as working
memory and processing speed.
Dyspraxia is a delay or disorder of the planning and/or execution of complex movements and
associated with this may be problems of language, perception and thought.
Dyscalculia is a difficulty in understanding the concept of maths, i.e., applying mathematical
rules. There can also be associated difficulties in time management and with dealing with
sequential information.
Impacts to be aware of:
There are five cognitive processes involved in creating the various difficulties in which
students with dyslexia, dyspraxia, scotopic sensitivity or dyscalculia may experience.
(i)

The memory processes – the particular memory processes involved are ‘working
memory and / or sequential memory’. In the traditional British view of ‘dyslexia’
these memory difficulties are regarded as being the cause of dyslexia, because
they greatly affect reading, spelling and mathematics. They also affect the ability
to give logical explanations because of the way they influence the order with which
points are made.

D – Assessment

(ii) The language processes – especially those involved with understanding the meaning of
words (semantics). Semantic problems may cause students to ‘lose’ words while they are
talking, struggle to ‘find’ the most relevant word to express what they are trying to say or
write, have difficulty understanding what they read (even though they know they’ve read it
correctly), and misinterpret what people say.
(iii) The auditory processes - which cause auditory perception problems i.e., difficulty
processing sounds even though they have been heard. The auditory difficulties are mainly
experienced as phonological awareness problems and /or over-sensitivity to certain sounds.
Phonological awareness difficulties greatly influence the development of reading and spelling.
(iv) The physical co-ordination processes – which cause difficulties sorting out left from
right, poor balance, and clumsiness. When severe, these difficulties can be diagnosed as
‘dyspraxia’.
(v) The visual processes – which create the problems of over-sensitivity to bright light and
changes in light intensity. The over-sensitivity causes problems in reading / looking at tables
of numbers etc. both in terms of physical discomfort (such as headaches) and/or distortions
of text (such as words moving or blurring). These problems appear to be eased by using
coloured overlays or tinted spectacles.
In summary, the following characteristics may therefore be evident in the written work
of students with specific learning difficulties:
✓ Tendency toward spelling errors, even in word-processed work. Spelling errors
may include: erratic and inconsistent spelling where words can be spelt in several
different ways in the same document; inappropriate use of phonetic spelling choices
(eny/any ordeance/audience); misuse of spell check facility leading to incorrectly
selected words (sublimely perception instead of subliminal perception); misspelling
proper names such as the names of researchers; telescoping polysyllabic words
(rembered/remembered); misuse of homophones (to/too), and letter reversals
(dose/does).
✓ Punctuation, grammar and sentence structure may be incorrectly or
inconsistently applied. This may include misuse or omission of punctuation marks;
failure to identify sentence boundaries with possible overuse of conjunctions; short,
unsophisticated sentences lacking in complexity, and inappropriate grammatical
constructions
✓ Language structure may show inconsistencies and not always have the correct
pace or flow, with omitted or repeated information, words or phrases.
✓ There may be difficulties in expressing ideas in a conventional academic style
of writing and written constructions may be unsophisticated. Equally, it may be
difficult to attain or keep to the recommended word limit. Students with dyslexia may
digress from the assignment topic by either including information that is irrelevant or
expanding unnecessarily on points of minor importance. Sometimes unusual links
between topics are made that reflect a student’s lateral and creative thinking skills but
do not meet the learning outcomes. Even though it will not be possible to award marks
for such digressions, it can be supportive to acknowledge the student’s research
attempts when providing written feedback
✓ Proof reading skills may to be unreliable in terms of spotting errors.
✓ Presentation skills may be poor even when work has been produced through
the use of computer packages.

D – Assessment

✓ Students with dyslexia often spend considerably more time on assignment
production than their non-dyslexic peers, but this effort is not always reflected
in their written work. Sometimes there may be a marked difference between the
student’s abilities as demonstrated in oral discussions and that indicated by written
expression.
At the Royal Agricultural University (RAU) disabled & neurodivergent students will have a
Reasonable Adjustment Plan (RAP), put in place by Student Services and when submitting
assignments students should attach an Assessment Cover Sheet (please see annex 2 below),
to their submission for academics to take into consideration for assessment, marking,
feedback and feedforward. For support with any disabled or neurodivergent student please
email: student.services@rau.ac.uk

Learning and Teaching
Support in the form of assistive technology software and specialist study skills tuition, is
designed to assist students with some of these challenges. As such, some students may
choose to actively engage with support to build strategies and make personal improvements
where this is possible. However, it should be noted that such support is unlikely to negate
challenges in entirety.
Students with an SpLD should therefore not be unduly penalised for spelling, grammar and
punctuation errors or poor expression of ideas. A student’s examination script should be
marked primarily for content, ideas and critical thinking.
However, the maintenance of academic standards should always be considered. It may also
be essential to the understanding of the course that particular words or phrases are used
correctly; in this instance, the assessor should take account of the error since the
understanding is core to the subject. These guidelines should also be implemented as and
when appropriate in courses that are externally accredited.
Other disabilities that this adjustment may cover
Whilst students with specific learning difficulties have well-recognised challenges in the
production of written work, other neurodivergent students may also share many of these.
There can also be a distinct overlap between conditions such as ADHD, autism, and
specific learning difficulties.
Therefore, the impacts highlighted elsewhere in this document may apply to a wider group of
students, but in addition, the following may be evident:
-

Difficulties using expressive or figurative language.
Repetition.
Overly detailed (difficulties with being succinct or summarising; tendency toward
perfectionism).
Difficulties navigating higher-level processes (such as the submission of work using
digital portals).

D – Assessment

Assessment
Guidance on marking for students who have a cover sheet
The following marking practice would apply where a cover sheet is in evidence:
Key principle: Establish the learning outcomes for the assignment in question. Mark the
work with the intention of giving credit for the student’s achievements in meeting these
learning outcomes by focusing on the content and understanding of the topic rather than
concentrating on written expression.
More generally therefore:
✓ Read and assess for ideas, understanding and knowledge.
✓ Aim for a clear separation between the content of the work and language errors, to
ensure there is no subjective interpretation of the student's ability.
✓ Mark principally for content and understanding - disregarding, as far as possible,
spelling, grammar and punctuation errors.
✓ Be very clear about the marking criteria, especially in terms of spelling, grammar and
punctuation. If feedback is given, please refer back to marking criteria and be clear
whether comments are for learning or have impacted marks for a legitimate reason.
✓ If the spelling, punctuation and grammatical mistakes do detract significantly from the
content of the work however, it may still be appropriate to highlight the necessary
corrections to spelling, grammar and punctuation in order to help signpost students to
sources of help and support (see giving constructive feedback below)
✓ It is recognised that in some instances, the grammatical construction or written style of
expression may obscure the clarity of the student’s ideas. If there are doubts over
meaning or conveyance of key points arising through language use that would
negatively impact the grade, consider using a viva voce (or voice recordings) as a
check and balance. This may allow the student a fairer opportunity to demonstrate
knowledge and ideas, but please be aware that it may not be appropriate in every
circumstance.
✓ In the event that a student with is still experiencing a significant disadvantage in
producing written coursework in spite of the above concessions, an alternative
assignment method may be appropriate for the module assessment.
Things to avoid:
➢ Avoid using red to denote errors, due to negative associations that the student may
have encountered in the past.
➢ Avoid over-emphasising mistakes, only correct repetitive errors for part of the work.

D – Assessment

Giving constructive feedback:
Key principle: Ensure that feedback is clear, constructive and sensitive to the student’s
difficulties. Good quality constructive feedback is likely to address the intangible aspects of a
SpLD; increased anxiety, lower self-esteem and expectations regarding academic
achievement.
✓ Certain symbols used for marking can be perceived as critical and can confuse
students with dyslexia, for example, crosses, question marks and exclamation marks
when used without sufficient explanations to establish the reason for their use.
✓ Comment as far as possible on the strengths of the student’s work and try the
‘sandwich technique’ when providing feedback (positive comments/constructive
advice for improvement/positive comments).
✓ Write legibly, avoiding complex sentence structures. Students with dyslexia often have
difficulty reading cursive script, so aim to keep handwriting as legible as possible.
Alternatively, feedback can be word-processed and attached to the student’s work.
✓ Even if you are marking without penalising for mistakes in the technical use of
language, students do need help to develop their written English skills. Therefore, a
marking system using codes could be employed to assist with feedback e.g. Sp spelling, G -grammar, SS - sentence structure, P - punctuation, V - vocabulary, O word omission, R - repetition, T - tense.
✓ If any core requirements have been established that conflict with the ability to fully
apply these marking guidelines, this should be stated in the feedback that is provided
on an assignment or examination script.
✓ Where spelling, punctuation and grammatical mistakes do detract significantly from
the content of the work it may be appropriate to signpost students to the following for
additional advice and support:
o

The Student Services Team for advice about assistive technology software and
specialist 1:1 support that may assist with planning, structuring, organising and
developing better proofreading skills. Some students may have this support
available already but have not accessed it or disengaged for a number of reasons.

D – Assessment

Annex 1
RAP Note Lookup Report
•
•
•

To open the report, start from the Quercus homepage and click the “Reporting” tile
Next click “AD HOC” along the top of the screen
Finally, open the “Module Lookup – Notes” reports

!R eporting

COURSES

MODULES

ORGANISATIONS

AD HOC

CUSTOM REPORT

Modu le Looku P- - Notes
Modu le Loo kup for Support ates

•
•

Once the report is open you can to do two things; select which module you wish to
view the notes for and export the data to excel
To select a specific module, click the window symbol located just below the “Data
Refreshed” timestamp

@) ellucian.
---------------------------

e

Modu le Lookup - Notes Report

oatarefre~hed2024-ll-llatl0:35:53

(!,

Back

•

A new window will pop up with series of filters available to change. The only filter to
change is the first one, “Module Code”. Simply find your required module in the list,
select it then click “Apply” at the bottom of the window. The page will main window will
refresh to show notes for this module. Once done click “OK”

D – Assessment

Input Cont rols

M odule Code

OIFYl
Course Instance Academic Yea r

2024
ID N umber not

Availa ble: 12,562

Selected: 4

Search list ...

000 12641
00029389
0003867 1
00039499
00041226
00055437
00063888
00 101050

U@i
•

OK

Reset

Cancel

Save

To export the data hover over the symbol that looks like a page with an arrow pointing
out from it. A list of export options will show, you need to select “XLSX”. The report in
its latest setup will export to excel

@) ellucian.

8 Module Lookup · No tes Report n,.,,,..,.,.,,,.,,_.,_,,,.,. ,.,,, i:,
i.;i

D – Assessment

nw Agricultural
lV\ University

Annex 2
Please place this page at the front of your assessment document, prior to uploading it
as one file to your assessment portal. (Insert > Object > Text from File > Select file)
Please place a tick in the boxes below that apply to you or to the piece of work you are
submitting.
Reasonable Adjustments Plan (RAP) declaration (select one)
confirm that I have a Reasonable Adjustment Plan as recommended by the Disability Learning Team. I
r Iunderstand
that this should be taken into consideration when my assessment is marked / graded.

r. I confirm that I do not have a Reasonable Adjustment Plan in place.
Generative AI declaration (select one)

r. Where I have used AI to research content, find authors, papers, or ideas, I have fully
referenced this in APA7 and provided the original text prompts in an appendix.

r I certify that I have not used any Generative Artificial Intelligence tools in the
preparation of this work.

Spelling, punctuation and grammar declaration (select one)

I have used Grammarly or similar to correct my spelling, punctuation, grammar

r and/or syntax due to a Reasonable Adjustment Plan (RAP), Disabled Student

Allowance (DSA) or language support requirement as an international student.

r. I certify that I have not used Grammarly or similar to correct my spelling,
punctuation, grammar and/or syntax.
