Position Statement on the use of generative AI tools in teaching,
learning and assessment.

1

Context and introduction

1.1

Generative Artificial Intelligence (GenAI) refers to complex computer systems
that can perform tasks that usually require human intelligence, generating high
quality outputs. This includes creative tasks such as writing text, generating
images, producing music, as well as tasks that are about collating or
processing information, responding to problems and making informed
decisions. These systems learn from vast amounts of existing information to
produce outputs that mimic human-like creativity and decision-making. This
capability makes GenAI particularly versatile in applications that require
innovation, customisation, or automated content creation. Beyond replicating
styles and patterns, some GenAI models can understand and respond to
context, make predictions, and even propose solutions to complex problems,
reflecting a significant advancement in how machines can assist in various
fields. It is now recognised that Generative Artificial Intelligence (GenAI) has
the potential for a profound impact on the ways in which we teach, learn,
assess, and access education.

1.2

Staff and students are already making use of GenAI tools such as ChatGPT,
Microsoft Co-Pilot, Google Gemini and DALLE (for example, there are many
others) to write text and create images. Academic staff can use GenAI to assist
lesson planning, generate new content and otherwise support innovative
teaching. The implications of GenAI for higher education are both positive and
negative. There is now general agreement in the sector that it is the
responsibility of Universities to ensure that GenAI tools can be used for the
benefit of students and staff. This means using GenAI within an ethical
framework to positively enhance teaching practices and student learning
experiences and ensuring students develop the capabilities to use GenAI
responsibly for their studies and future working lives.

1.3

Staff and students need to understand how GenAI tools work, their limitations
and benefits, as well as appreciating how GenAI can support the development
of graduate attributes and future employability. Students need to also develop
an understanding of how GenAI can be used to support the preparation of
assessments without compromising academic integrity.

1.4

Along with other Universities, our position is not to prohibit the use of GenAI
tools, but rather to provide all members of the academic community with
support and guidance on how GenAI can be used responsibly and ethically; this
is what is sometimes referred to as GenAI literacy or GenAI capital. Key to the
responsible use of GenAI tools is intellectual ownership of academic work and
1

the proper acknowledgement of the role played by GenAI tool in developing the
work. The use of Gen AI tools cannot therefore be separated from the
development of critical thinking and analytical skills.
1.5

The Russell Group of Universities has agreed the adoption of a set of 5
common principles to inform the use of GenAI by HE institutions. This
guidance takes those principles as a basis for providing a framework for the
use of GenAI within teaching, learning and assessment that takes account of
the disciplinary and pedagogical context of learning at the University of
Worcester.

1.6

As GenAI technologies continue to develop, it is vital that across all disciplines
the specific implications are discussed and best practice in teaching, learning
and assessment that takes account of contexts is fostered and implemented.
This includes equitable access to tools and to support to develop GenAI literacy
and GenAI capital for success in education and work. We are aware of the
challenges for students in relation to the digital divide and therefore recommend
the use of Microsoft Co-pilot in relation to academic work.

2

Principles for the use of Generative AI tools

2.1

The following principles adapted from the Russell Group’s work, will guide our
approach to the use of GenAI:
•
•
•
•
•

Staff will be supported to develop capabilities in the appropriate and
ethical use of GenAI to support student learning.
Students will be supported to develop GenAI literacy/capital so that they
are able to use GenAI critically, responsibly, and ethically.
Teaching, learning and assessment strategies will be adapted to
incorporate ethical use of GenAI tools.
Academic integrity and rigour in assessment will be upheld.
A culture of innovation, collaboration, and sharing of best practice in the
application of evolving GenAI tools will be fostered.

3

GenAI and Learning and Teaching

3.1

All students should have opportunities to develop GenAI literacy with respect
to:
•
•
•
•

Understanding the significance of GenAI for their studies and future
careers.
Recognising appropriate and inappropriate uses of GenAI in supporting
learning and assessment.
Appreciating the strengths and limitations of GenAI when used as part of
the learning experience.
Developing the skills to utilise GenAI tools critically and ethically to
support learning and to avoid compromising academic integrity in
assessments, including referencing the use of GenAI.

2

3.2

Course teams working with Learning and Teaching Directors and Co-ordinators
should determine how GenAI can be incorporated into programme design and
learning and teaching activity. PSRBs, external examiners and subject
communities of practice are likely to be sources of expertise and experience.
Considerations should take into account learning outcomes, pedagogic
practices, the development of graduate attributes and skills, disciplinary
conventions, and where applicable PSRB accreditation requirements.

3.3

How course teams are developing students’ GenAI literacy will be considered
through course approval and will be regularly reviewed to foster consistency of
approach and to promote innovative and best practice responses. As GenAI
tools evolve and our institutional good practice develops, so will the nature of
teaching, learning and assessment pedagogies.

3.4

GenAI tools have significant potential to support and enhance the student
learning experience, and staff should support and encourage appropriate and
responsible use. For example, students might be encouraged to use GenAI
tools to prepare for classes and seminars or workshops, and also in relation to
aspects of assessment preparation.

3.5

In providing guidance for students on the use of GenAI in relation to
assessments, the University Library Services will maintain advice and guidance
for students on webpages, including examples of what is and is not acceptable.

3.6

There may be assessment contexts where the use of GenAI tools is not
appropriate, and module tutors should make this clear in assignment briefs.
Further examples of appropriate and inappropriate use of GenAI can be found
in the annexe.

3.7

Academic staff incorporating GenAI tools within their teaching or assessments
should ensure:
•

•

familiarity with the opportunities, limitations and ethical issues of GenAI
tools, which should be discussed with students. Examples include privacy
and data considerations; potential for bias; inaccuracy and
misrepresentation of information; ethics codes; plagiarism; sustainability
and exploitation.
familiarity with the specific privacy policies or user agreements relating to
their use. Students should be explicitly alerted to these policies whenever
GenAI is to be used.

3.8

Course and module handbooks should be updated to include details of the
University’s policy regarding the use of GenAI tools by students and its
implementation within the School. Schools and course teams will need to plan
carefully for educating students as part of their induction and ongoing progress
through higher education at both module and course level.

3.9

GenAI offers the potential for academic staff to enhance their learning and
teaching materials and assessments, for example through content generation
(e.g. case studies, simulations), problem solving and data analysis.
3

3.10 Where GenAI tools are used by academic staff to create course materials, this
should be clearly articulated and referenced within the learning materials or
assessments. Academic staff are individually responsible for ensuring the
factual accuracy and quality of any materials created using generative GenAI
tools.
4

GenAI, Assessment and Academic Integrity

4.1

Given the current fast changing environment for GenAI, it is important to talk
regularly to students about academic integrity and GenAI. This Policy is based
on the position that the use of GenAI tools for assessments is acceptable
provided such tools are used responsibly, and academic integrity is maintained.

4.2

GenAI also has implications for the design and development of assignments by
staff, since some types of assessment are more susceptible to inappropriate
use of GenAI that would not be consistent with academic integrity and may be
impossible to detect. All academic staff have an individual responsibility to
review their assessments to mitigate the effects of the inappropriate use of
GenAI tools.

4.3

Within all modules, academic staff should clearly articulate the acceptable use
of GenAI tools by students (or where in a specific context such use may not be
appropriate), based on this Policy and associated guidance. There should be a
consistent approach across modules within a course wherever possible, and
there should be clarity for students on how they should acknowledge and
reference the use of GenAI (see Cite them right guidance here).

4.4

Students should be first introduced to the ethical use of GenAI ahead of any
summative assessment and ideally as part of the early formative assessment
for first year students. However, course teams will need to consider how
students working at all levels, including post-graduate will be supported to
develop GenAI literacy/capital and an understanding of what is and is not
permissible for assessments. The importance of students maintaining a record
of how they planned and constructed their assignment, detailing the use of
GenAI where appropriate, should be embedded as part of good academic
practice.

4.5

Staff should note that tools designed to detect the use of GenAI are known to
be problematic and therefore their use is not currently permitted by the
University.

4.6

The University has reviewed its academic misconduct procedures, and
reference to use of GenAI tools is incorporated. It is the responsibility of all
course teams to ensure that all students understand the concept of academic
integrity, and within this, when and how the use of GenAI is inappropriate. It
follows that all courses should include space for discussion with students of
academic integrity and how this relates to the use of GenAI, so that students
can make informed decisions, and can act ethically and responsibility where the
use of such tools is permitted.
4

5

References and resources
University of Worcester (2023) Procedures for Investigation of Alleged
Misconduct. Available at:
https://www2.worc.ac.uk/registryservices/documents/Proceduresforinvestigatio
nofallegedacademicmisconduct.pdf (Accessed: 31st August 2023).
Russel Group: Russell Group principles on the use of Generative AI tools in
education (2923). Available at
https://russellgroup.ac.uk/media/6137/rg_ai_principles-final.pdf (Accessed 6th
September 2023)
UW Student Guidance for use of AI:
Generative AI guidance. You can, you shouldn't, you mustn't.pdf - Google
Drive
Approval/Review Table
Item
Version Number
Date of Approval
Approved by

Notes
1.0
22nd May 2024
LTSEC – 22nd May 2024
Academic Board – 26th June 2024

Effective from
Policy Officer
Department
Review date
Last reviewed
Policy/procedure/guidance
superseded by this version

June 2024
Head of Quality and Educational Development
Quality and Educational Development
May 2027
New document
Replaces draft principles and guidance for the use of
Generative Artificial Intelligence tools in learning,
teaching and assessment.

Equality Impact
Assessment (EIA)
Accessibility Checked

27th November 2023
27th November 2023

5
