Academic Writing Handbook
Guidance for students

Academic Writing Handbook – Guidance for students
© London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine.
Last updated October 2025

Introduction
As a postgraduate institution, LSHTM expects all students to demonstrate a high
standard of academic practice in work undertaken for LSHTM programmes. This
handbook gives general guidance about how to write in the ‘academic style’
LSHTM expects. It should be applicable for students at all levels (MSc, Diploma,
Certificate, short course, or even Research Degrees), whether studying in
London or by distance learning.
This supplements basic guidance you will have been given in your programme
handbook or other similar documents (e.g. project handbook, research degrees
handbook). Please take some time to read the information here, especially if you
are not already familiar with concepts like how to reference and avoid
plagiarism, or if you have not studied in a UK higher education institution before.
Developing your understanding and making use of the guidance can potentially
help you attain better grades.
The handbook should be particularly useful for those writing extended pieces of
work, e.g. projects, although the basic principles should apply to all writing
completed as part of your studies. It is structured with specific sub-sections you
can ‘dip into’ and refer back to if you need guidance on something specific.
•

Chapter 1 covers some basic information about how to structure your
written work, the standard of English expected, etc. However, this chapter
does not go into great detail, and instead gives links to further useful
resources.

•

Chapter 2 to Chapter 4 give more extensive guidance on what is perhaps
the most important element of good academic writing – learning to cite,
reference and acknowledge your sources, so as to avoid the risks of
plagiarism or other irregularities. Further useful links are also given; but
what is here represents LSHTM’s policies on these matters.

•

Chapter 5 gives some information about copyright.

In the event of any inconsistency between the information in this handbook and
any other LSHTM document, please contact your Associate Dean for Education
(taught programmes) or Faculty Research Degrees Director.

1

Table of Contents
INTRODUCTION

1

CHAPTER 1: WRITING SKILLS

5

A. General guidance for academic writing
A.1. Reviewing the literature
A.2. Considering the topic and examining the question
A.3. Planning
A.4. Major structural elements
A.5. Presentation
A.6. Language skills and standards
A.7. Developing independent and critical thinking

5
6
6
8
8
9
10
11

B. Further resources for developing your writing skills
B.1. Overall tips on writing theses and dissertations
B.2. More information on good writing practice
B.3. Style guide for medical journal articles
B.4. Other relevant study skills resources

12
13
13
14
14

CHAPTER 2: CITING AND REFERENCING

15

A. Principles of citing and referencing
A.1. Which referencing style to use

15
17

B. Citing a source in the body of your text
B.1. When to provide page numbers
B.2. Distinguishing citations from your own notes
B.3. The Harvard referencing style (author/date)
B.4. The Vancouver referencing style (numbering)

18
18
19
19
21

C. Creating a reference list
C.1. Presenting the reference list in Harvard style
C.2. Presenting the reference list in Vancouver style

21
22
22

D. Citing sources in altered contexts
D.1. Self-citation
D.2. Indirect citation, and secondary sources
D.3. Common knowledge that does not need to be referenced
D.4. ‘Off-topic’ references
D.5. Referencing tables and figures

23
23
23
24
25
25

E. Using reference management software
E.1. Benefits of using reference management software
E.2. Which reference manager to use

27
28
28

F. Further resources about citing and referencing
F.1. Guides to referencing systems
F.2. Guides to citing and referencing in general

29
30
30

2

CHAPTER 3: AVOIDING PLAGIARISM AND OTHER ASSESSMENT
IRREGULARITIES

31

A. Assessment irregularity definitions
A.1. Rules on assessment irregularities
A.2. Plagiarism, and how to avoid it
A.3. Collusion, and how to avoid it
A.4. Personation, and how to avoid it
A.5. Fraud, and how to avoid it
A.6. Cheating
A.7. Use of Artificial Intelligence (AI)

31
31
32
33
35
35
37
37

B. Assessment irregularities procedure
B.1. Penalties

38
38

C. Detecting plagiarism
C.1. How Turnitin works
C.2. What happens when suspected plagiarism is identified?

38
39
40

D. Tips to help you avoid plagiarism and other assessment irregularities
D.1. Leave enough time for the research process
D.2. Use clear note taking techniques
D.3. Keep an up-to-date list of your potential sources

41
41
41
41

CHAPTER 4: RECOGNISING THE CONTRIBUTION OF OTHERS

42

A. Principles for acknowledging input from others
A.1. Marking of work
A.2. Group work

42
43
44

B. Proof-reading and help with writing or language
B.1. Proof-reading and advice from others
B.2. Proof-reading and copy-editing for research degrees theses

44
44
45

C. Giving acknowledgements
C.1. Including an Acknowledgements section
C.2. Research participants
C.3. Additional requirements

46
46
47
47

CHAPTER 5: COPYRIGHT AND INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY

48

A. LSHTM policies for student work
A.1. Copyright and intellectual property rights
A.2. Copyright and IPR agreements for major work
A.3. Copyright that otherwise applies to your work as a student
A.4. Intellectual Property Rights – LSHTM policy
A.5. Setting restrictions on access to your work

48
48
49
50
50
50

B. Publication of student work
B.1. Authorship
B.2. Obtaining copyright permissions for publication
B.3. Open Access

50
51
52
52

3

B.4. Creative Commons licenses
B.5 Academic Affiliation

53
53

4

Chapter 1: Writing skills
The ability to produce good-quality written work is a key aspect of obtaining your
degree, and likely to be very important in your subsequent professional life. This
chapter offers some brief guidance on ‘general’ writing skills – how to organise
your ideas and present your work well. Links to more comprehensive guidance
and resources have been provided.
If you have not done a great deal of academic writing in English recently, then as
preparation for formal assessments you may find it helpful to practice turning
your study notes into ‘exam-style’ answers or ‘essay-style’ paragraphs and
sections. You may be able to ask someone appropriate (such as a tutor) to
comment on whether such material meets the standards required for
assessments.
Artificial Intelligence tools (AI) can be helpful for generating and synthesising
ideas about topics. They can also help you with the writing process, for example
by providing feedback on written work or help with grammar and spelling. If you
are considering using AI in your assessments, read about LSHTM’s position on
Artificial Intelligence in assessments here and explore the Generative AI and
your learning resources prior to starting your work. They provide guidance on
using AI safely and ethically. Always remember that, whilst you may use AI to
assist you, you must declare this. You must always take responsibility for the
work you submit and use AI in ways that uphold academic integrity.

A. General guidance for academic writing
The style of writing required for LSHTM assessments may call for different skills
to those you have used in your previous education or employment. If you are
not entirely confident in this, remember that the more academic writing you do,
the better you will become at it. Aspects that may be new or unfamiliar, such as
citing and referencing, should become much easier when you have had the
chance to practice applying them in different assessments. Staff may also give
you comments or feedback about your writing style and help you to identify
whether there are any aspects you can improve.
The following guidance is intended to help with all forms of writing. It is mainly
drawn from guidance about producing essays or reports that are a few thousand
words long. However, these ideas may be applied for shorter work including
assignments of less than a thousand words.

5

A.1. Reviewing the literature
Your first step should normally be to gather together all your existing knowledge
about the topic(s) you need to address, e.g. by checking back through lecture
notes, and identifying the areas where you need to learn more. Depending on
the requirements of the work or assessment, it may be necessary to carry out a
thorough literature review; Library & Archives Service staff will provide more
help and guidance about how to do this most effectively. Your course may have
a Literature Searching session scheduled in your timetable. If not, see the
InfoSkills sections of the Library Moodle page for guides, videos and online minimodules.
Even if you are not required to do a formal literature review, it will usually be
helpful to prepare a list of all the key academic literature on the subject, which
you can update as you work through your reading and writing for the
assignment. Putting key details into a reference management programme (e.g.
EndNote, Mendeley or Zotero) can help make things easier for later on.
Guidance about this is given in Chapter 2.
Using reference sources
Publications such as literature reviews, and online sources such as Wikipedia
may be helpful as starting points to scope the general area you are covering.
They may identify some academically reliable information and direct you
towards more authoritative primary sources.
If you want to quote the dictionary definition of a particular term, please
acknowledge this using a note with your reference list.
Wikipedia and similar online resources are not considered a reliable source of
information for academic work, and you should never cite them in any work at
LSHTM. No professionals in any LSHTM discipline would ever normally cite
Wikipedia or other such sites when writing a journal article, government
document or similar. You are expected to uphold the same standards in your
work as a postgraduate LSHTM student.
This does not mean you cannot make use of such resources; they may still be
helpful research tools to point you towards authoritative primary sources.
However, you should treat Wikipedia and similar websites with caution, and
always verify anything you find using primary or reliable sources.
A.2. Considering the topic and examining the question
As well as reviewing the literature, before you start writing it is always useful to
spend some time thinking carefully about the topic. If there is a specific question
you have been asked to answer, can you break it down into a set of smaller and
6

more specific questions? If you are required to choose your own topic, what are
your options? The further resources in section B consider some of the many
different techniques which exist for brainstorming and generating thoughts and
ideas – e.g. about how problem X affects issue Y, and what follows from this. Do
whatever works best for you; but as an end result you should aim to come up
with a clear idea of the scope, parameters and dimensions of what you will
cover.
Another useful approach is to consider what kind of perspective or lens you can
use to look at the topic. What theories or evidence does the literature provide?
What different groups of people are affected by the subject under discussion?
What arenas does this issue affect (e.g. social or economic impacts)? What
factors underpin it (e.g. physical or biological variables)? What components is the
issue made up of? What tensions or challenges does it create? Can you give
some case studies? You may wish to think about commenting on and critiquing
some, not all, of the different approaches that may be taken to answering the
question.
It is important to always answer the question or ensure you fully address the
subject your title indicates. Examine the question carefully to identify any subquestions and consider exactly what is being asked in order for you to address it
explicitly.
It is usually helpful (especially with word count constraints) to strategically select
specific issues you will deal with – rather than attempting to deal with
absolutely everything that may be of relevance. One way to do this is to briefly
list all major issues that may apply, then state which subset of these you will
consider in depth.
Look at the question from different angles; and where appropriate, try to use a
mix of theory/literature and practice/personal elements – i.e. integrating
academic context (from your reading) and particular case material. It is often
useful to present examples as structured case studies (with comparable
information and evidence) – this can help support your argument much more
strongly than scattering different unrelated examples throughout the text.
Apply criticality – don't simply quote or describe the work of others; show how
they differ, take a position and examine pros and cons, be sceptical. If
appropriate, use a variety of perspectives and theoretical frameworks/concepts.
Aim to demonstrate excellence through comprehensive engagement with and
understanding of the topic, insightful analysis that leads to a compelling
argument, and demonstrating original or independent thinking (for example,
adapting an existing model from the literature to work in a new way).

7

A.3. Planning
A good piece of academic writing should always be well-structured – being clear,
consistent, relevant and readable all the way through, to support an
authoritative conclusion. The best way to achieve this is by planning your
structure and arguments in advance.
You may feel that simply writing or typing away in a stream of consciousness is a
technique that proves effective for you. However, you will need to edit and
adjust the structure for clarity of understanding so be prepared to come up with
a first draft which you then aim to improve.
Having identified all the main aspects of the topic that you want to cover, you
should develop a structure. Typically, each point you wish to make will
correspond to a paragraph or two in the final work. Ideally, all your points
should flow in a logical sequence from one to another, to create a coherent
proposition or argument. Everything you include should be relevant to the
question or title of the work and create a consistent answer or treatment of it.
You may need to discard certain points or ideas that don't fit with this plan or
refine them so that they are relevant to include.
You should also be aware that while the guidance here is generic, certain
programmes or assessments will have much more specific requirements for how
your work should be written up and structured. In some cases, this may mean a
requirement to follow established public standards – for example if you are
working in an epidemiological area, you may be required to follow the CONSORT
and STROBE guidelines for reporting of clinical trials and observational studies.
Please check the assessment requirements you have been given (especially the
project handbook for any MSc students doing a project) to see what may apply
in each case.
A.4. Major structural elements
The kind of written work you produce as an LSHTM student may be greatly
varied – but invariably, everything you write will need to have a beginning, a
middle and an end. For anything at essay length or longer, this will normally
correspond to an introduction, main content, and a conclusion.
The introduction should set out for the reader the topic that you are going to
cover. It should normally include a brief interpretation of the title or question
(including defining any key terms) – i.e. what the issue is, and why it is important.
It should set the scene briefly, mentioning any key contextual issues relevant to
the topic. It should make clear how the assignment/essay/report will be
structured, so as to address the title or question. This signposting is an

8

important first step and will give the reader a clear indication of your academic
voice and interpretation of the topic to be considered.
The main content of your work is obviously dependent on the topic you are
addressing.
•

If you are describing a scientific experiment, the ‘Methods–Results–
Analysis–Discussion’ approach is standard and may be encouraged in the
assessment criteria.

•

If you are writing a more discursive essay, it is often useful to use an
‘argument–interrogation–integration approach’, i.e. taking a specific issue
from the data or idea from the literature, establishing the context and
identifying the main issues or problems, examining and critiquing
strengths or weaknesses (giving practical case examples is often helpful),
and making a judgement about it.

Generally, it is good to give ideas from both theory (literature) and practice
(evidence from you or from others). It is also generally helpful to set out specific
strategies or recommendations for how to address any problems you have
identified. And unless discouraged in the assessment criteria, it is generally good
to include some personal views about the issues, e.g. reflecting on examples
from your own experiences, or critiquing aspects of the literature. However, note
that personal opinions should always be clearly labelled as such, and should not
dominate a piece of academic work.
The conclusion should summarise everything you have set out in the main body
of the work, recapping arguments/findings/recommendations you identified
earlier in the main content. As a general rule, you should avoid introducing any
new material in your conclusion. You should reflect on the argument, variables
or critical factors, and the implications of the issues raised. The conclusion
should pair up with and reflect the introduction – to form a coherent whole that
supports the main content.
A.5. Presentation
The way you present your work may have a limited, but important, effect on the
mark it receives. Some key rules to bear in mind are:
•

Follow the exact presentation or formatting criteria that are laid out in the
assessment guidelines – e.g. font size, line spacing, margins etc.

•

Present your work so it demonstrates the underlying structure, e.g. with
headings and subheadings to distinguish different sections.

9

•

Be consistent in the formatting style you apply – e.g. using the same font
and font size throughout the main part of your work; or standardising
your use of different formats (bold, underlining etc.) to distinguish
headings and subheadings.

•

Paragraphs should be short-to-medium-sized and uncluttered. Ensure you
put a line break after each paragraph, to make them more visually
distinct.

•

Reinforce the narrative flow of your work and the power of your
argument, by using visual elements (e.g. tables, diagrams, charts) and
signposting (e.g. headings, recaps and summaries) throughout. Use of
bullet-pointed or numbered lists may be helpful.

A.6. Language skills and standards
LSHTM is proud to have a very diverse student body, including many for whom
English is not their first language, or others returning to study from a job which
did not require regular academic-style writing.
If you are not fully confident in your fluency, please be reassured that a perfect
standard of written English is not a general requirement for assessed work.
Rather, LSHTM assessments will normally ask you to produce readable and
evidence-based commentary or analysis that puts your points across clearly.
Your use of language needs to demonstrate your knowledge of the topic, not
your fluency in English, so you should not be marked down for minor
imperfections.
However, all LSHTM programmes are English-language-based, and all students
are expected to have a standard of written English sufficient to demonstrate
their academic competence. If you are worried about your level of English, you
may wish to take some additional language training, separate to your LSHTM
programme – the British Council, www.britishcouncil.org, are a good source of
information on English courses available in different countries around the world.
LSHTM has English for Academic Purposes study materials that students can
access on Moodle. Students studying in London can also attend a free
programme of ‘English for Academic Purposes’ workshops.
While this handbook cannot cover all the ways you might want to use English in
your writing, the following points may be useful:
•

Always remember that the objective of a piece of academic writing should
be to produce something readable and evidence-based that puts your
points across clearly.

10

•

Aim to use straightforward clear phrasing. Choose words because they
are clear and precise and convey exactly the meaning you intend, not
because they sound complex and clever.

•

Sentences should be no more than two or three lines long at the most
– any longer sentences are probably too long and should be broken down.

•

Try to ensure your spelling, grammar and punctuation are correct. It is
a courtesy to the reader to make your work as readable as possible, as
well as a key part of being able to communicate ideas and demonstrate
knowledge.

•

Choose to write in a specific ‘voice’ and do this consistently. ‘Voice’
includes formality, tone, and writing for a specific audience.

•

When you have finished writing a draft of your work and are reasonably
happy with it, you may ask someone else (for example, a first-language
English speaker) to proof-read it. They may then make suggestions about
your use of language, grammar, etc. If you are considering using Artificial
Intelligence (AI) for proof-reading support, make sure to consult the
LSHTM Artificial Intelligence in assessments resource first to learn what
types of usage are permitted.
Always proof-read your work (yourself) before submission.

•

A.7. Developing independent and critical thinking
All LSHTM assessments will require you to demonstrate knowledge of the basic
facts in the area under discussion, by making use of the literature, and citing the
work of relevant authorities. Over and above this, at postgraduate level you are
expected to demonstrate evidence of independent critical thought and real
understanding. As well as summaries of what other researchers have found, you
should give details of what you think of their findings and their interpretations.
Your point of view should come across to the reader as a justified judgement or
reasoned argument, and not simply as an opinion.
As outlined in Chapter 2, it is vital that the work of others is cited or
acknowledged appropriately wherever you make use of it – otherwise you run
the risk of plagiarising. The references you use should demonstrate your reading
and learning.
Conversely, you should be aware that over-reliance on referencing is liable to
attract a lower mark. While a correctly presented reference is never in itself a
bad thing, it would be seen as excessive for a piece of work to consist almost
entirely of referenced quotations or paraphrasing of the work of others. Work
that demonstrates a lack of original argument or analysis, or understanding and

11

engagement with the topic, is liable to fail – so you need to give your own
comments about work that you are citing.
You should also avoid learning information by ‘rote’. Rote learning involves
memorising extracts of text or information, often for the purpose of recalling
and reproducing the material in answering an examination question. Students
that do so risk failing to acknowledge the source or author correctly and may
therefore commit plagiarism. LSHTM assessments are designed to test your
understanding and application of knowledge, not simply to test of your capacity
to reproduce large extracts of information or text.
To obtain high marks, you will almost always be expected to:
•

Examine a particular body of knowledge – which may be your own
research, or the work and ideas of others, or a combination of the two.

•

Demonstrate your understanding of this knowledge – beyond simply
stating facts or repeating information from textbooks or other sources,
you should show that you have learnt and can apply the concepts and
skills involved.

•

Critically examine and challenge such knowledge – give your own views
and analysis, and aim to identify both strengths and weaknesses (whether
in your own research or in the work of others).

When putting forward the viewpoints of others, it may be useful to consider your
own opinions or alternative thoughts. As you write, ask yourself ‘How does this
demonstrate critical thinking?’, and ‘How does this demonstrate independent
thought?’ You may be able to give examples to show that you understand the
concepts, or to compare and contrast different facts or ideas to show that you
have thought critically about them.

B. Further resources for developing your writing skills
All students, no matter how experienced or fluent in producing written work, will
benefit from reflecting on how you approach the 'skill' of writing for academic
purposes. The Library has a wide range of books that provide guidance and
support for academic writing and study skills, shelved under the classmarks
AH.AZ and AR.AT. Similar books tend to be reasonably priced and commonly
available from bookshops catering to students and academics. Those listed
below are available to borrow in the Library. You should find at least some of the
following selection of books and online resources helpful.

12

B.1. Overall tips on writing theses and dissertations
Recommended links are provided below:
•

An extensive set of resources on good writing practice is available from
Purdue University Online Writing Lab, USA. Click on the ‘General Writing’
link for guidance that is likely to be helpful in writing assignments and
essays.

•

Swetnam, D. (2004) Writing your dissertation. 3rd edn. How To Books,
Oxford.

Also potentially helpful:
•

Hamilton College, USA, provides useful tips on using sources, with
guidance on citing and paraphrasing, through their academic center
writing resources.

•

Murray, R. (2017). How to Write A Thesis. 4th ed. Open University Press,
Maidenhead.

•

Wallace, M. & Wray, A. (2021) Critical Reading and Writing for Postgraduates.
4th edn. Sage, Los Angeles.

•

Winstanley, C. (2009) Writing a Dissertation for Dummies. John Wiley & Sons
Ltd, Chichester.

B.2. More information on good writing practice
Recommended sources:
•

From the Open University, a comprehensive set of introductory-level
online tutorials about planning, structuring and writing academic
assignments or reports.

•

Bailey, S. (2017) Academic writing: a handbook for international students. 5th
edn. Routledge, London.

Also, potentially helpful:
•

In-depth guidance on all aspects of documenting sources and academic
writing from University of Maryland University College, USA.

•

Craswell, G. (2012) Writing for Academic Success – A Postgraduate Guide. 2nd
edn. Sage, London.

•

Murray, R. and Moore, S. (2006) The Handbook of Academic Writing – A Fresh
Approach. Open University Press / McGraw Hill, Oxford.
13

•

Goodson, P. (2013) Becoming an academic writer. Sage, Los Angeles.

B.3. Style guide for medical journal articles
Recommended:
•

The British Medical Journal website explains the BMJ’s official instructions
for authors on the ‘house style’ to use in submitted papers. These include
many helpful tips for good writing in general, e.g. grammar and
punctuation, as well as more specific guidance on exactly what the BMJ
will accept. This can be seen as a ‘gold standard’ of how you should aim to
put a paper together for medical topics

B.4. Other relevant study skills resources
Recommended:
•

LSHTM's own study skills page has links to many further useful study
resources. As well as the writing skills links given above, this covers areas
like research skills, using the internet and searching databases, as well as
maths and numeracy, memory skills, time management, groupwork,
presentation skills, etc.

Also potentially helpful:
•

The British Council is a good source of information on English language
training/courses available in different countries around the world:

•

Burnapp, D. (2009). Getting Ahead as an International Student. Open
University Press, Maidenhead.

•

Cottrell, S. (2024). The Study Skills Handbook. 6th edn. Palgrave, Basingstoke.

14

Chapter 2: Citing and referencing
Academic writing, particularly when it is formally assessed, has to follow rules
and conventions. Among the most important of these are the rules and
conventions about citing and referencing the work of others. These help to
distinguish academic material from other forms of writing.
Scholars and researchers should always clearly state which ideas and work are
their own and which are other people’s – by citing and referencing correctly. This
chapter sets out LSHTM’s standard guidance on how to do this, which should
apply for all work that you do in the course of your LSHTM studies. Additionally,
certain modules or programmes may have more specific requirements that will
be explained during your studies.
LSHTM’s key requirements are that your written work should always:
1. acknowledge the work of others wherever you make use of it;
2. present such acknowledgements in a consistent way using a recognised
citation system;
3. give a well-presented reference list at the end of your work.
You are also encouraged to make use of reference management software,
particularly for extended pieces of work with many references. Such software
allows you to manage citations and reference lists in your work more easily and
more consistently than doing so manually. The package supported by LSHTM is
EndNote and guidance is available for using this; further details are given in
Section E. Mendeley and Zotero are free, cloud-based apps which are designed
to do a similar job to EndNote.

A. Principles of citing and referencing
A citation or reference is a way of properly acknowledging where you make use
of the work of others. ‘Citing’ means giving such an acknowledgement within the
main body of a piece of work, while ‘referencing’ is a broader term which covers
both in-text citations and the more extensive information about your source
material which should be presented at the end of your work. As well as allowing
any of your readers to consult your references, this also gives authority to your
work by demonstrating the breadth of your research.
You must always clearly identify any and all directly copied quotations (such as
sentences, phrases or even striking expressions), by placing them inside
quotation marks (e.g. “quotation marks”), followed by a clear citation. You must
15

equally clearly indicate where you have paraphrased or summarised another
person’s words, ideas or judgments – by referring to that person in your text
(e.g. by giving a reference in a bracket after the paraphrasing, or in a footnote)
and including the work referred to in your reference list.
Sources can include (but are not limited to):
•

published works such as journal articles or books (including any textbooks
set by the programme or module – even if markers will know exactly
where something comes from, you must still state it clearly);

•

literature such as conference proceedings or reports from organisations
and government agencies;

•

material from the internet, whether or not it has a named author;

•

unpublished material such as lecture/tutorial notes or other students’
work;

•

personal communication such as emails or conversations with other
people (be they staff, students, friends or others).

Your reference list or bibliography should list sufficient details of each of your
cited sources to ensure that your reader can consult the exact source you refer
to. Therefore, care must be taken to record this information when you initially
read it, particularly if it is published online. Online information can radically
change without warning, so the date of access is usually added to the reference.
Details of what information to record for each reference type is provided in
Section C – Creating a reference list. You must cite AI tools and include them in
your reference list. There are specific recommendations for citing AI generated
text and for acknowledging if you have used ideas created by AI tools in the
LSHTM Generative AI and your learning resources.
You should always use a recognised citation system or style for your references.
This will determine how you present references in the main body of your work,
and how you present the reference list at the end. There are a large number of
recognised systems; the two most widely used in medicine and science are
known as Harvard (the author/date style) and Vancouver (numbering style). Both
are described more fully in this guidance. Whichever system you adopt should
be used consistently throughout your piece of work – never ‘mix and match’
different referencing styles.
The body of your work should make clear which pieces of information have
come from your own research and which have come from the work of others. As
well as citing and referencing sources, you should also acknowledge any further

16

assistance you have received in preparing your work. Further guidance is given
in Chapter 4 on recognising the contribution of others.
The guidance on referencing used throughout this document comes from two
sources:
•
•

Harvard: the University of London provides examples of the Harvard style
Referencing Styles: Harvard | The Online Library
Vancouver: guide produced by Monash University Library, Australia
(Getting started - Vancouver 2022 - Subject guides at Monash University)..

You should follow this guidance if you are manually adding references to your
documents. If you are using reference management software, it is unlikely that
you will find a style which matches the punctuation in these guidelines exactly.
What is important is that you are consistent with formatting within your work,
and reference information is presented in the correct order.
Choose a style ensuring that your reference list is formatted to include sufficient
details of your sources for your reader to easily consult them, while still
conforming to the guidelines required by your programme of study or module.
A.1. Which referencing style to use
There are many other well-recognised citation systems in addition to Harvard
and Vancouver. Specific modules or programmes may teach you particular
advanced approaches or prescribe certain writing styles that meet the
conventions of the field you are working in. Otherwise, it will normally be up to
you to decide which system you would like to use.
It may be helpful to note:
•

The Harvard system can be easier to use since the insertion of an extra
reference does not require the renumbering of all subsequent references
(as it can with the Vancouver system - although this is done automatically
by reference management software). This tends to be a good system to
use for discursive essay-type work, or in fields like social science.

•

The Vancouver system may aid clarity and readability where the same
item is cited many times, since you just need to give the same numeric
reference in each case rather than cluttering up your work with
repetitions of author-and-date details. This tends to be a good system to
use for more technical work, e.g. in relation to lab-based experiments, or
in medical writing.
Other alternative styles of referencing may also be recommended for a
specific piece of work. For example, footnotes-based styles such as the

•

17

Chicago style, MHRA, or the Turabian system are commonly used for
presenting research in historical fields such as history of public health.
It is also useful to be aware that academic journals provide instructions to
authors (which are usually accessible via their websites) to describe the specific
‘house style’ they use for references. For example, both the British Medical
Journal (BMJ) and the Lancet use variations of the Vancouver system.
Remember that whichever referencing style you use will have its own
requirements for both presenting a citation in the main body of your text (the
data and format required) and presenting the reference list at the end (the data,
order and format required). These requirements will also vary depending on the
type of source, e.g. journal articles, books or websites may all require slightly
different information to be given in the reference list.

B. Citing a source in the body of your text
You should always give a formal citation at the first point you make use of a
source. The citation is likely to go at the end of a sentence that mentions an idea,
or after a quote. If you then carry on discussing material from that source or
giving further quotations, you don’t need to repeat the citation at the end of
every sentence or quote, provided that you don’t make use of any other sources
in that discussion, and that you present it in a way that makes clear to the reader
that this is all based on the same source.
One way of making the source clear without repeating the full citation is to use
the Latin term ‘ibid’, meaning ‘the same place’. For example:
“Community workers cannot provide comprehensive care for all community
health needs” (Haines et al. 2007, p.167). However, “they can have an important
role in increasing coverage of essential interventions for child survival” (ibid).
B.1. When to provide page numbers
Page numbers should be added to your citations whenever you cite a direct
quote or a specific element from a long document. This is to help readers to
find the element you mention if they go to look up the source. It also allows you
to include a book just once in the reference list, but cite different specific pages
or sections at various points in your work. To explain further:
•

Sources like journal articles, conference papers and short reports do not
necessarily need a page reference and can be presented in the standard
form, such as ‘(Abrams, 1969)’. Someone looking up the source, from the
detailed information you give in the reference list at the end, could
18

•

reasonably be expected to find the specific element you mention.
However, if giving a direct quote from the text or reproducing a table or
figure you should also give the page number.
For lengthier sources like books, PhD theses or long reports, if you are
specifically giving a quote or referring to an idea on particular pages, then
you should always specify the page(s) involved. The reference can either
be to a single page – e.g. ‘Using Bushaway's (2003, p.142) definition of
research management’; or to a range of pages, for which you should give
the start and end pages separated by a dash – for instance ‘International
views on effective public policies for health (WHO 2008, pp. 64-65)’.

•

However, if you are referring to an idea or body of knowledge represented
by the entirety of a long-form source like a book, you do not need to give
page numbers. The context in which you present the citation should make
this clear, for instance ‘applying the concept of human capital put forward
by Becker (1994)’.

•

The above examples are cited in the Harvard style, but the same
principles apply in Vancouver and most other styles. For example, ‘Using
Bushaway's definition of research management1 (p142)’.

B.2. Distinguishing citations from your own notes
If you are using footnotes in your writing and a numerical citation style (such as
Vancouver), you should use symbols, rather than numbered footnotes, to clearly
distinguish between them. For example, the ICMJE (www.icmje.org/) recommend
the following sequence of symbols for putting explanatory matter into footnotes
underneath a table: *, †, ‡, §, ||, ¶, **, ††, ‡‡, §§, |||, ¶¶, etc.
Similarly, you should be careful to clearly distinguish citations, i.e. mentions of
other people’s work, from further explanations of your own work which might
involve brackets, such as spelling out abbreviations, giving details of complicated
units of measurement like ‘number of infant deaths per 1000 live births and
stillbirths’, or making reference to additional details you have put in a footnote,
endnote or appendix.
B.3. The Harvard referencing style (author/date)
•

The author's surname and year of publication should be quoted in the
text, e.g. ‘as confirmed by Abrams (1969)’ or ‘as confirmed by another
study (Abrams, 1969)’.
o If citing different authors with the same surname then distinguish
them by adding their first name, e.g. ‘(Clive Bond, 1993)’ versus ‘(Julia
Bond, 1997)’.

19

o If there are two or three authors then all should be named, e.g. ‘(Sewell
and Foster 1976)’ or ‘(Bond, Norrish and Burton 1994)’. Authors’ names
should always be listed in the same order as they are credited in the
original.
o If there are more than three authors, then use the first author’s name
followed by ‘et al.’, e.g. ‘(Gillespie et al. 1983)’.
•

If the author's name is already clearly indicated in that piece of text, then
only the date needs to be entered as a citation, e.g. ‘Beral’s findings on
links between ovarian cancer and HRT (2007) suggest that...’

•

You may need to distinguish works from the same author(s) that date
from the same year. This should be done by adding different lower-case
letters (in alphabetical order) after the year. For example, if you are
making use of two World Health Organisation reports from 2008, you
should cite them as ‘(WHO, 2008a)’ and ‘(WHO, 2008b)’ – with the ‘a’ and ‘b’
versions also being clearly distinguished in the reference list.

•

Note that when citing an edited book whose contributors are not the
same as its editor, your in-text citation should add the word ‘ed.’ after the
editor’s name, e.g. ‘Black (ed. 1998) confirms’ or ‘(Black ed. 1998)’.

•

You do not normally have to include page numbers in your text or
reference list. However, if you are including a direct quote or a specific
piece of information which would otherwise be difficult to find in the
source, a page number should be included. Examples might include a
statistic obtained from a book where its location cannot be inferred from
the section title or author comments which are not directly related to the
main topic of discussion. Enter the page number after the date e.g. ‘(Beral,
2007, p.5)’.

•

Multiple citations should be separated by a semicolon, e.g. ‘Societal
transitions in Eastern Europe have been described as a risk environment
linked to increased mortality through alcohol use and HIV infection
through injecting drug use (Bobak and Marmot, 1996; Leon et al. 1997;
2007; McKee, 2002; Rhodes and Simić, 2005; Rhodes et al. 1999; Walberg
et al. 1998).’ These should be listed in alphabetical and chronological
order.

•

When citing a report or other publication which has no specific authors
because it has been written by an organisation (such as a government
publication, NGO report, or similar), then your in-text citation should use
the name of the organisation in place of an author e.g. ‘(CSIRO, 1996)’.

20

Anonymous works not originating from a specific organisation are
referred to by their title in parentheses e.g. ‘(A History of Greece, 1994)’.
B.4. The Vancouver referencing style (numbering)
•

•

Each citation should be numbered sequentially in the text using
superscript numbers, e.g. ‘as confirmed by Abrams.3’. In Word, the
keyboard shortcut for superscript is pressing Ctrl, Shift and the + sign at
the same time (repeat to remove the setting).
The first citation is given number 1, the second citation number 2, etc.
Each citation is given the same number throughout the text so if you wish
to cite the first citation again at a later point, it is still given the number 1.
o The placement of the citation numbers within the text should be
carefully considered, for example, a particular reference may only be
relevant to part of a sentence. As a general rule, reference numbers
should be put outside full stops and commas and inside colons and
semi-colons.

•

You do not normally have to include page numbers in your text or
reference list. However, if you are including a direct quote or a specific
piece of information which would otherwise be difficult to find in the
source, a page number should be included. Examples might include a
statistic obtained from a book where its location cannot be inferred from
the section title or author comments which are not directly related to the
main topic of discussion. Enter the page number after the reference
number: ‘Bushaway's definition of research management1 (p142)’.

C. Creating a reference list
Your reference list should include details of all sources cited in your work. How
your reference list is formatted depends both on the citation style you are using
and the type of source you are referencing. In all cases you will have to provide
enough information to allow your reader to consult the original source material
if they wish to do so.
You should also note that the term ‘reference list’ is often used interchangeably
with ‘bibliography’ but has a slightly different meaning.
•

A reference list (or ‘works cited’ list) should only include items you have
referenced in your work, even if you read other sources while researching
the topic.

21

•

A bibliography should cover all sources you consulted in preparing your
work, even if you did not end up making use of them; or sometimes, a
bibliography may be presented as a comprehensive annotated list of
further reading on a topic. However, you should always distinguish works
you have actually made use of from any others you are simply listing.

•

In longer works, such as academic books, a ‘works cited’ list may be given
to cover references in the text, followed by a bibliography of
recommended reading.

For the purpose of LSHTM assessments, you should normally provide a
reference list unless the assignment criteria specifically request a bibliography.
C.1. Presenting the reference list in Harvard style
The reference list or bibliography should be arranged by alphabetical order of
the first author's name – an example (for a journal article) would be:
Ganapati, R., Naik, S.S., Acharekar, M.Y. and Pade, S.S. (2011). ‘Leprosy
endemicity in Bombay: an assessment through surveys of municipal
schools’, Leprosy Review,
47( 2), pp. 127-131.
Guidance on how to cite and reference in the Harvard style for a wider variety of
sources can be found in Imperial College London’s Harvard Citing and
Referencing Guide.
C.2. Presenting the reference list in Vancouver style
The reference list or bibliography should list the references in numerical order,
i.e. the order in which they appear in the text – an example (for a journal article)
would be:
Ganapati R, Naik SS, Acharekar MY, Pade SS. Leprosy endemicity in
Bombay: an assessment through surveys of municipal schools. Lepr Rev.
2011;47(2):127-31.
Comprehensive details of how to use the Vancouver style are given in the guide
produced by Monash University Library, Australia (Getting started - Vancouver
2022 - Subject guides at Monash University), which also provides multiple
examples.

22

D. Citing sources in altered contexts
D.1. Self-citation
If you are submitting something that builds on work you previously did for
another purpose – e.g. a published article, an essay for a programme previously
undertaken at another institution, or a piece of research carried out as part of
your employment – you should reference this as carefully as any other source.
Similarly, if you want to re-use work you first did for a previous LSHTM
assessment (e.g. to use elements of a module assessment in an MSc project
report), this needs to be made very clear – as credit can only be given once for a
particular piece of work.
This is known as self-citation. Professional academics and researchers often ‘selfcite’, and indeed it can be considered good academic practice. Doing this as a
student will not harm your grade, and indeed can show the extent of your work
on, and knowledge about, the subject.
However, be aware that if you fail to reference or acknowledge your own work
(i.e. anything originally done for other purposes) as clearly as the work of others,
then this may be treated as a form of plagiarism (see Chapter 3). Even if you own
the copyright to the original work, you still have a responsibility to refer to it
correctly.
As an example of self-citation: A 2009 paper by Rhodes (‘Risk environments and
drug harms’, International Journal of Drug Policy, 20:193-201) begins with the
following sentence referring to his own previous work on the topic: “Drug harms
are shaped by risk environments (Rhodes 2002).”
D.2. Indirect citation, and secondary sources
Indirect citation means making use of a source you have not directly seen
yourself, but only seen referenced in some other source (the ‘secondary source’).
This is strongly discouraged – it is best to look up the original versions of any
primary sources you identify via secondary sources and confirm their validity
before making any use of them. Over-reliance on secondary sources is seen as
poor academic practice, and unlikely to achieve a high mark.
However, in circumstances where you have very limited library or journal access
or the primary source is difficult to track down (as is often the case where you
want to use a quote from a historical figure), it may be acceptable to cite a
secondary source provided you clearly label the provenance of your information.
Always give a direct quote from what is written in the secondary source, rather
than paraphrasing it, so as to avoid distortion; and use the terms ‘quoted in’ or
‘cited in’ to show how the secondary source refers to the primary source.

23

•

An example of how to cite a quote from a secondary source in your text:
“The proper function of a university is the imaginative acquisition of
knowledge” (Whitehead, 1929, quoted in Ramsden, 2003).

•

•

The reference for this citation will be the full source details for Ramsden
2003, because a reference list should only contain the sources that you
have looked at. By including the information about your source in the
citation, you ensure that your citations and your reference list still match.
You should not paraphrase ideas from any source that you have not
actually seen in a primary form, unless it is absolutely necessary to do so,
and you make absolutely clear that you have drawn this from a secondary
source.

D.3. Common knowledge that does not need to be referenced
For well-established and commonly known facts ('general knowledge') which you
can be confident a reader will already be aware of and understand, you should
not usually need to provide a reference. Any such facts should invariably be ones
you can confidently write down without referring to anything else, which you can
expect your readers to know, and which would also be easily checkable if
desired – for example, that Paris is the capital of France.
Similarly, if you are writing for a specialist readership (e.g. submitting a piece of
work to a scientific journal or for assessment by experts in your subject field)
then you may not need to reference well-established scientific facts, terms,
methods or procedures within that field.
However, if in any doubt as to whether a specific term can be held to be
'common knowledge' for the field, please err on the side of caution and give a
reference. For example, in the field of microbiology, if mentioning by name a
standard laboratory technique for cultivation and isolation of bacteria, then you
should not normally need to provide a reference for it; but if you have used a
slightly more obscure technique which might not be known to all readers, then
you should give further details.
Any points which are fundamental to the content of your work should be more
fully referenced, even if they are generally held to be common knowledge. For
example, ‘smoking causes cancer’ is now a fairly universally known and accepted
scientific fact. In a paper about alcohol control you could mention this as an
aside, without giving a reference. However, if your paper was on the specific
effects of smoking, you ought to refer to basic primary research supporting the
statement ‘smoking causes cancer’.

24

As a general rule that applies to everything you write, not just matters of
common knowledge – if in doubt, cite. Each time you write about an idea, take
a phrase or use a definition from something you have read or heard (e.g. a
document, information from the internet, or a personal communication), you
should provide a clear reference to the original source.
D.4. ‘Off-topic’ references
Even if an item you quote or reproduce is not of direct academic relevance to the
topic, you still need to acknowledge it appropriately. For example, you might
wish to add some ‘local context’ by including a poem by a well-known national
poet in the preface to a project about nutrition in India, or by including a stock
photograph of spectacular scenery on the cover of a project about fieldwork in
South America.
In such cases you should give a clear note about the provenance of what you
have included. You should not assume that your readers will recognise a
particular quote, or immediately understand that an image was not created by
you. However, you do not need to include ‘off-topic’ references like this (i.e.
items which do not contribute to the academic content of your work) in the
reference list, provided they have been referenced in full within the main body
of your work.
D.5. Referencing tables and figures
Your work may potentially include photographs, diagrams or graphs etc. (known
as ‘figures’), or tables of data or text, that are the work of others. These must
have their provenance clearly indicated through a citation and reference.
All figures and tables should be captioned and must be referred to in the main
body of your text. Figure captions appear below the figure and are numbered
sequentially (e.g. Figure 1, Figure 2). Table captions appear above the table and
are also numbered sequentially (e.g. Table 1, Table 2). The captions should
include a brief statement of what is included in the figure or table, together with
definitions for any symbols or acronyms used.
If you are reproducing a ‘text box’ or a list of bullet-points from another work,
you can present it either as a straightforward piece of quoted text (giving a clear
and appropriate citation), or as a labelled table (with an equally clear indication
of the source).
Tables of data, e.g. published demographic information, also need to be
referenced as clearly as you would any direct text quotation.
You should cite the source of the table or figure as you would cite any other
piece of information. Include the original page number and table/figure number
25

in your caption and include the source in your references. For example, the
caption in your text may look like this:
Table 1 – Hazard ratio of disability according to physical activity,
consumption of fruit and vegetables, smoking, alcohol drinking, and
number of unhealthy behaviours, excluding first four years of follow up
(n=2584) (Artaud et al. 2013, Table 3).
The reference in your reference list will be:
Artaud, F, Dugravot, A, Sabia, S, Singh-Manoux, A, Tzourio C and Elbaz, A
(2013) ‘Unhealthy Behaviours and Disability in Older Adults: Three-City
Dijon Cohort Study’, BMJ, 347, p. F4240, doi: 10.1136/bmj.f4240.
If you are reproducing an image/photo/diagram/graph or similar from a public
source, you should cite and reference it in the format relevant to the source you
took it from – e.g. a journal-format reference for a graph originally published in a
journal article; a web-format reference for an anatomical diagram you found on
the internet. For example, an image taken from LSHTM’s digital asset
management system Asset Bank might be cited as:

Figure 3 - Larval tapeworms from a case of sparganosis (2009).
The photograph would then be listed in your reference list as:
Larval tapeworms from a case of sparganosis 2009, Asset Bank, London
School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, file PL-6116.tif, accessed 22 July
2010. https://lshtm.assetbank-server.com/assetbank-lshtm

26

Also remember that if you find images using a search engine like ‘Google
images’, you need to click through to identify the original source and cite that –
do not cite Google images (this principle applies to absolutely anything you find
using a search engine).
Tables, text boxes or lists that are entirely your own work do not need a citation
or reference. However, they do need a caption.
If you are using a photo you have taken yourself, you should indicate its
provenance by giving a citation with your name, an approximate date or year,
the location of the photo setting, and any other details that may be relevant. You
do not need to give a reference in the reference list.
If you are using a photo taken by a personal contact (e.g. a colleague at a field
site) who has given you permission to use it, you should cite that individual as
the source and also include date and location. If the photo is relevant to the
academic content of your work (e.g. a photo of a parasite you are studying), you
should also give a full reference in your reference list. However, if the photo is
simply for visual interest, you do not need to list it in your reference list (see
section D.4).
Finally, if your work is to be published, whether in print, or online only,
remember that you will need to obtain specific permission from the copyright
owner(s) to include each table, figure or any other material you wish to
reproduce in this way.

E. Using reference management software
Various computer software packages are available which allow references to be
readily recovered from databases, easily inserted into your document, and
automatically adjusted whenever any other alterations are made. These are
known as ‘reference management’ packages.
LSHTM supports a package called EndNote. You may alternatively wish to use
one of the many free, cloud-based packages, such as Mendeley or Zotero.
You are strongly encouraged to become familiar with the use of one of these (or
another reference manager if you prefer) from early in your studies. It will be
particularly helpful to learn to use such a tool before you start any extended
literature searches.

27

E.1. Benefits of using reference management software
Software packages such as EndNote can greatly simplify your referencing –
maintaining accuracy while reducing the amount of time you need to spend
inserting or updating references in your documents – and are especially useful
for longer pieces of work such as projects, dissertations and theses. They all
cover the same core functions:
•

Reference managers store and manage bibliographic data, and act as a
mini database of references you are using. You can retrieve
comprehensive reference information directly from many online
databases, saving you the time of typing them in by hand.

•

After inputting your references, they can be searched, sorted and
grouped, and you can add your own notes, tags and comments. Grouping
relevant items or adding notes and tags while conducting your literature
search is a good idea, as it should make it easier to identify these topics
again later on when writing up relevant parts of your work.

•

These packages link in with word processing applications like Microsoft
Word. This lets you easily insert correctly formatted citations throughout
your document while you are in the process of writing it. The software can
automatically create and update a reference list at the end of your work.

•

References can be presented in whichever format you desire from a
selection of available styles (e.g. Harvard or Vancouver – with the option to
re-format from one to the other with a single button-click). The software
can automatically adjust for any later edits or alterations, for example
renumbering in Vancouver style if an extra reference is added.

E.2. Which reference manager to use
EndNote, Mendeley and Zotero all do fundamentally the same thing but in
slightly different ways, and with different advantages. EndNote is the most wellknown and can be accessed through LSHTM credentials. Mendeley and Zotero
are both free and also offer functions like online collaboration and sharing of
reference files. The following information may help you decide what to use or
try:
•

EndNote is a well-established package that has been used at LSHTM for
many years. London-based students can request access to Endnote
through the LSHTM Service Deck. Endnote is available for DL students and
can be accessed via Moodle (using their University of London
details/access).

28

o Key benefits: It does the job, is well-known, is able to import
references from most online databases and has a comprehensive
range of bibliographic output styles, including for most well-known
journals. For London-based students, training is available.

•

o Any drawbacks: You have free access to it while at LSHTM, but you
may need to pay for it after leaving LSHTM
Mendeley, www.mendeley.com is a free desktop and web-based
application provided by Elsevier, a large commercial publisher.
o Key benefits: It does the job, it is free, it can import references from
most online databases, and has sharing /collaboration features. Stores
PDF files and allows you to extract data from them e.g. bibliographies.
o Any drawbacks: You need to register online to use all features
(though this is still free). The LSHTM IT Services Department will not be
able to support you if you have any problems.

•

Zotero, is a free web-based open-source application from a US not-forprofit organization, available at www.zotero.org/
o Key benefits: It does the job, it is free, it can import references from
online databases, and it has sharing/collaboration features. Being webbased means it can be used almost anywhere.
o Any drawbacks: The LSHTM IT Services Department will not be able to
support you if you have any problems.

F. Further resources about citing and referencing
The guidance earlier in this chapter sets out LSHTM’s standard expectations
about citing and referencing. However, during the course of your studies you
may come across types of material that have not been detailed above and which
you are not sure how to reference; or you may want to use an alternative
referencing style to best suit the type of work you are doing.
Various recommended resources and guides are listed below which describe
good practice in referencing and citing. While they may each suggest different
approaches, you are likely to find the answers or instructions you are looking for
in at least some of them. Otherwise, you can ask staff (such as your tutor,
supervisor or the module/programme staff responsible for the assessment you
are taking) to suggest how they would prefer to see a particular item referenced.
Library staff may also be able to provide guidance if you are stuck.

29

F.1. Guides to referencing systems
Recommended:
•

Harvard system: there is no single guide to the Harvard system of
referencing; however, Imperial College London has a guide with extensive
examples of how to reference different types of source material in-text
and in a bibliography, available here: Harvard Citing and Referencing
Guide.

•

Vancouver system: Monash University Library, Australia, provides a
helpful guide to the Vancouver (number) style, with a large number of
examples, available here: Getting started - Vancouver 2022 - Subject
guides at Monash University

Also potentially useful:
•

The book ‘Cite Them Right’ by Richard Pears and Graham Shields is a
widely recognized standard explaining how to cite hundreds of different
types of materials in the correct format. The 9th edition is available from
the Library: Pears, R & Shields, S (2013), Cite Them Right: The Essential
Referencing Guide (9th ed), Palgrave Macmillan, Basingstoke. Or the most
recent 2022 edition is relatively cheap to buy.

•

Other referencing systems: Monash University, Australia, provides
guidance on a variety of different citation styles, including APA and MLA

F.2. Guides to citing and referencing in general
Potentially useful:
•

Yale University has a very good guide to using sources, included as part of
Writing Resources for Graduate Students | Poorvu Center for Teaching
and Learning.

•

Princeton University provides a good summary of when and how to cite
sources as part of a larger information set about academic integrity.

•

The University of the West of England’s introductory guide to referencing
includes specific guidance on some of the main citation systems.

30

Chapter 3: Avoiding plagiarism and other assessment irregularities
As a student of the LSHTM, you are expected to comply with our standards and
expectations in all your scholarly activity – especially assessments, examinations
and research.
This chapter sets out LSHTM’s definitions of ‘assessment irregularities’ – things
you must not do in your work. It is important that you make yourself aware of
these definitions. Any breach of the rules, whether intentional or unintentional,
will be treated very seriously and may result in penalties which affect your
degree.
The definitions are followed by guidance about how to ensure your work follows
the rules. A worked example shows how to avoid plagiarism, building on the
citing and referencing guidance given in the previous chapter.
Please consult your tutor, Programme Director or supervisor if you are having
any difficulties with assessed work, need clarification or guidance about citing
and referencing, or are in any doubt about what is permissible.

A. Assessment irregularity definitions
The term ‘assessment irregularity’ applies to any suspected instance of
plagiarism, cheating, fraud, collusion, personation or other non-standard activity
identified in connection with assessed work – including essays or other
coursework assessments, formal examinations, or research projects. Definitions
are given below.
Note that the term ‘irregularity’ does not necessarily imply misconduct on the
part of a student. Judgement as to whether a specific offence has occurred will
only be made following proper investigation of the case under LSHTM’s
procedures.
It may also be helpful to observe that although these definitions and guidance
are specific to LSHTM, understanding and applying them as good scholarly
practice may be relevant in your work after graduating. LSHTM’s principles on
issues such as plagiarism or fraud are consistent with typical expectations in
academia or scientific research around the world.
A.1. Rules on assessment irregularities
When students register at LSHTM they are agreeing to abide by the institution’s
Ordinances and Regulations, one of which is a requirement that all assessed

31

work submitted is and will be the student’s own. Failure to comply with LSHTM’s
policies may be penalised.
Registration also includes consent for LSHTM to upload relevant documents and
information to the plagiarism detection service Turnitin UK for cross-checking
assessment submissions – further information about this is given in section C1 –
How Turnitin works.
For specific items of assessment – particularly MSc project reports and Research
Degree theses – students may be required to complete additional specific forms,
e.g. to reiterate that the work presented in the thesis is their own, or to
acknowledge and describe the contributions of others.
A.2. Plagiarism, and how to avoid it
Plagiarism is the copying or use of the work of others, whether intentionally or
unintentionally, as if it were your own. Such work may come from any source
whether published or unpublished, in print or online – including words, images,
audio recordings, diagrams, formulae, computer code, performances, ideas,
judgements, discoveries and results.
To avoid plagiarism:
•

where any use or mention is made of the work of others, it should be
acknowledged;

•

a recognised citation system should be used;

•

quotations must accurately refer to and acknowledge the originator(s) of
the work;

•

direct quotations, whether extended or short, must always be clearly
identified;

•

paraphrasing – using other words to express the ideas or judgements of
others – must be clearly acknowledged;

•

work done in collaboration with others must appropriately refer to their
involvement and input;

•

use of your own past work should be referenced as clearly as the work of
others.

To put this another way: plagiarism is essentially the presentation of another
person's work (such as their words or ideas) as if it were your own – even if this
is done accidentally. LSHTM expects all students to demonstrate rigorous and

32

respectful academic practice at all times, particularly through referencing and
citing as described in the previous chapter.
Plagiarism is considered wrong because it does not clearly indicate where prior
work or knowledge has been used, it is disrespectful to the original authors, it is
misleading for those teaching you and marking your work, it may give the
impression that you are trying to gain credit for someone else’s achievements,
and it may be harmful to the reputation of LSHTM and the University.
You should also understand that plagiarism is not the same as copyright
infringement, which is unauthorised use of published work. Plagiarism is about
failing to correctly acknowledge the use of any type of intellectual property or
source material. Copyright infringement is more specific and may have
additional legal and financial implications.
To avoid plagiarism, all sources on which you draw must be properly
indicated and referenced, using a recognised citation system. This is vital for all
work completed outside classes or exams – such as coursework, essays, project
reports and research theses. Every time you quote or summarise someone else's
work, you must provide readers with accurate details of where the information
came from. Further details on citation are given in Chapter 2.
Note that failure to observe the rules, even unintentionally, may constitute
plagiarism and be penalised accordingly. Most cases of plagiarism are not due to
students deliberately copying the work of others and trying to pass it off as their
own, but because information they used was not appropriately acknowledged or
referenced. It can be easy to copy text but forget to add the appropriate
reference; however, you must make every effort to avoid doing so, or else you
run the risk of committing plagiarism. LSHTM has sophisticated mechanisms for
detecting plagiarism, some of which are outlined at the end of this chapter.
Your referencing must also be accurate; if a reader checks one of your
references and does not find the information expected, the source is termed
'unacknowledged’, and you may be accused of plagiarism.
A.3. Collusion, and how to avoid it
Collusion is any form of collaboration with another person, including another
student, that has not been clearly acknowledged or permitted for assessment
purposes (either when being submitted, or during the course of an
examination).
Different forms of collusion may be regarded as either plagiarism or cheating.

33

As with plagiarism, the essence of LSHTM’s policy on collusion is that all input to
your work must be clearly acknowledged. There are further key principles to
note.
•

Sources: While LSHTM encourages students to learn from each other and
to make full use of the expertise of staff, we also need to know what you
individually know, understand and can do. Therefore, anything submitted
for assessment must be your own work. It will always be important to
note where you have drawn ideas from others, even via informal means –
e.g. making use of (unpublished) Moodle discussions with other students
about a topic must be acknowledged.

•

Appropriate input: Other people may potentially have some input to
your work, but this must be appropriate for the task you have been asked
to undertake. For example, it is normally fine for a tutor to read your work
and give you critical comments before you submit it; but not for them to
rewrite it for you. Equally, it is normally fine to ask a friend or family
member to read your work and check the spelling and grammar, but not
for a peer (especially anyone with specialist subject knowledge) to edit it in
a way that changes the meaning of text or the accuracy of data and
calculations. In all cases, the input of others must be explicitly
acknowledged in your submitted work. Further guidance on how to do so
is given Chapter 4.

•

Group work: While the majority of assessments at LSHTM require an
independent piece of work, group work assignments may also be set. In
these cases, the final submission from the group must constitute the work
of the group, and any input from others (such as guidance from a tutor)
should be clearly acknowledged – further guidance on this is given
Chapter 4. The submission is normally expected to have been based on
roughly equal contributions from group members, although some
variation in contributions may be reasonable. However, full participation
is a requirement in order to pass your programme overall, and students
who do not contribute adequately to their assigned group may not be
eligible to receive a grade or credit for the work of that group.

•

Similar answers: Where an assessment question is likely to produce very
similar answers from students (e.g. mathematical-type problems, or
requests to describe a specific lab procedure), markers will know to
expect this. However, any indications that answers have been directly
copied from an identical source may result in a charge of collusion.

•

Deliberate collusion: Where input from others has been used but
concealed, this will be treated very seriously and is likely to constitute
34

cheating (see also the definition of personation in section A.4). Examples
could include asking another student to write or edit part of any
assignment; or two students collaborating to produce an assignment,
then submitting either identical or very-slightly-amended versions which
each claim as their own work rather than acknowledging the other.
•

Secondary collusion: All students are individually responsible for
safeguarding their own current or past work – e.g. assignments, essays,
projects, reports, dissertations, theses, or even primary work such as
notes, lab results or fieldwork data – to prevent it from being copied
inappropriately by other students or persons. If you make your work
available to others, you should remind them to acknowledge you if they
use it, and that they must not copy it without attribution. Failure to do so
on your part may make you liable to a charge of collusion.

A.4. Personation, and how to avoid it
Personation is the deliberate submission of work done by another person or
technology (e.g. another student, a friend, a relative, a peer, a tutor, or anyone
else, including generative AI and translation software) as if it were one’s own.
Such work may come from any source whether published or unpublished, in
print or online – including words, images, audio recordings, diagrams, formulae,
computer code, performances, ideas, judgements, discoveries and results.
This may cross over with a range of other offences: submission of another
person’s work with their knowledge is likely to constitute collusion; doing so
without their knowledge may constitute plagiarism; representing a piece of joint
or group work as the student’s own is likely to constitute fraud; and deliberately
procuring work from sources or commercial entities such as essay banks would
be considered cheating (see Section A.6). Arranging for another person to falsely
identify themselves as a student and take an exam on their behalf would be
seen as a particularly severe form of personation and cheating.
The above definition should be self-explanatory, and it should be clear that
personation is a very serious offence which will be treated accordingly. Again,
the essence of LSHTM’s policy is that your work must be distinguished from that
of others – including that all sources you draw from must be clearly
acknowledged.
A.5. Fraud, and how to avoid it
Fraud is the submission of any work which may cause others to regard as true
that which is not true. This covers work which has been fabricated (e.g. with
invented data or cases), falsified (e.g. with wilfully distorted data), omits
significant items (e.g. ignoring outliers, not admitting that some data are missing,
35

not admitting other relevant post-hoc analyses, omitting data on side effects in a
clinical trial, non-disclosure of a conflict of interest, etc.), or in any way
misrepresents the work or research carried out. Fraud may be by intention, by
disregard of possible consequences (e.g. in failing to adequately describe the
input of others), or by negligence (e.g. submission of work based on distorted
data due to poor data handling practice). Assessment or research fraud may
cross over with a range of other offences, from plagiarism (e.g. unattributed
copying of the research data of others) to cheating, collusion or personation. All
students are expected to comply with the LSHTM Good Research Practice policy.
A full definition of research misconduct is included within the policy.
Fraud is a strong word, but also a difficult concept to define for academic work.
The essence of LSHTM’s policy is that all work you do should demonstrate a
commitment to scientific truth, the advancement of genuine knowledge,
and values of the academic community. Personal or other interests should
never over-ride these commitments.
The most serious forms of fraud are deliberate – fabricating or falsifying work, or
omitting significant items, while knowing that this misrepresents the work done
(or not done). This is likely to constitute cheating and will be treated severely by
LSHTM.
Please also be aware that non-deliberate errors may result in work whose
substance is essentially fraudulent. It is vital that all students make the effort to
understand what constitutes good practice for the type of work they are
undertaking (which may be specific to the subject), and the type of programme
they are registered for. Higher standards are expected for higher awards, such
as Master’s degrees or research degrees. While LSHTM understands that
students may make mistakes as part of the learning process, and will treat cases
appropriately, ignorance can be no excuse for errors which affect fundamental
academic standards.
To help clarify the definition, some key principles to note include:
•

Fabricating (making up) data, quotes, results or any other aspect of your
work should be self-evidently wrong and will be treated as fraud.

•

Falsifying data or other elements or work is equally serious if done
intentionally. However, this may also happen unintentionally – e.g. by
accidentally copying data into the wrong column, by mixing up the
attribution of quotes, or by making a mistake in calculations. If poor
presentation or writing results in misrepresentation of facts, this will
normally just be ‘marked down’ and not treated as fraud. Nonetheless,
errors considered to be seriously negligent may be penalised under the
36

Assessment Irregularities procedure, even if they were not necessarily
deliberate.
•

Omitting relevant information may also be treated as fraud. Deliberate
omissions of important matters are very liable to be treated as fraud – for
example not disclosing a conflict of interest, failing to acknowledge a
contributor or credit a co-author, or not admitting that you did other
analyses which reached different conclusions to the ones now put
forward. Accidental or unintentional omissions may also in some
circumstances be penalised under the Assessment Irregularities
procedure, particularly if they demonstrate negligence in your academic
work – for example omitting data on side effects in a clinical trial, failing to
obtain ethical approval where this was required, using participant data for
which consent was not obtained, or not mentioning gaps in your results.

Teaching and guidance provided as part of the preparation for an assessment
will always make clear what is expected of you, and mention any major errors to
be avoided, such as failure to seek necessary approvals. Where genuine errors
or poor practice occur (e.g. sloppy data handling which brings in false data, or
disregarding outliers in results due to a lack of understanding of what they might
mean), these will usually be seen as part of the learning process – being awarded
a lower mark, rather than being penalised.
A.6. Cheating
Cheating is a deliberate attempt to deceive in order to gain advantage in an
assessed piece of work, including coursework, in-module assessments and
examinations. This covers a range of offences, from significant instances of
plagiarism to exam misconduct. All students are expected to comply with the
LSHTM Good Research Practice policy
Cheating will be treated more seriously and result in heavier penalties than
other forms of assessment irregularities.
A.7. Use of Artificial Intelligence (AI)
Artificial Intelligence (AI) tools, when used appropriately, can support you in your
learning and research. As a scholar and researcher, you have an obligation to
use these tools ethically and responsibly, whilst also ensuring you do not
contravene our academic regulations relating to plagiarism, collusion,
personation, fraud or cheating (see sections A.2 – A.6 above). For further
guidance on how to use AI appropriately during your studies, please view
LSHTM’s General principles of AI use.

37

B. Assessment irregularities procedure
LSHTM’s formal ‘Academic Integrity (Assessment Irregularities) Policy’ and
procedure, established under the Academic Regulations, sets out how any
allegations will be investigated, and the potential penalties that may be applied.
This is available via the LSHTM intranet in Chapter 7 of the academic manual.
You do not need to be aware of the detailed content of this procedure, but you
should be aware that it exists. In the event that an allegation or case arises
which affects you, anything you are required to do will be clearly communicated
and explained. Your tutor, supervisor, Programme Director(s) or the Registry
should all be able to provide further advice if necessary.
B.1. Penalties
Where an assessment irregularity is identified and confirmed, a range of
penalties may be invoked – e.g. a reduction of the grade, or an outright fail for
the piece of work with a requirement to re-submit. The nature and extent of
each case will differ, so there is no standard set of prescribed penalties in
relation to specific offences. However, severe offences may result in students
having their registration on a programme terminated, or even being excluded
from entry to any further LSHTM examinations or future degree/certificate
awards from LSHTM.
The above details are not intended to frighten you; occasional slips in attribution
or similarity of text may happen with even the most diligent student. All relevant
factors will be taken into account in consideration of any case, and students will
be presumed innocent unless the contrary can be established through formal
procedures and on the balance of probabilities. However, please do not be
tempted to copy material plagiarism and other offences are easy to detect, and
the risks are very high. It is not unusual for one or two students a year to fail an
entire module or even their entire degree programme due to assessment
irregularity issues, including for plagiarism.

C. Detecting plagiarism
LSHTM staff have a responsibility to ensure that all students' assessed work is
marked fairly and equitably – this includes checking for plagiarism or other
issues, to ensure that no-one gains an unfair advantage. Staff have considerable
expertise in identifying plagiarism, and all markers look out for assessment
irregularities and have access to a variety of tools to assist them.
LSHTM uses the plagiarism detection service Turnitin UK, which is widely used by
universities across the country. Any work you submit for assessment may be
38

cross-checked using Turnitin. Administrative offices (for Teaching Support,
Distance Learning or Research Degrees) may upload any students’ work upon
request of the markers. This is done anonymously, by candidate number, and
this material cannot be seen by others unless permission is given by LSHTM
staff.
C.1. How Turnitin works
Turnitin compares students' work against a very extensive pool of journals,
periodicals, books, databases, current and archived internet pages, and other
published or grey literature, as well as previously submitted student work from
subscribing institutions around the world (including from current and past
LSHTM students).
Turnitin creates a ‘similarity report’ for each piece of work run through it,
highlighting which elements have come from other sources in the database, and
to what proportions. This also provides tutors with links to the source files, and
the facility to compare matching text between the submitted work and the
originals. As in the screenshot below, Turnitin is capable of matching text even
where words, phrases or entire sections have been changed, removed or reordered.

39

Figure 1: Turnitin screenshot, comparison against an individual text
source
C.2. What happens when suspected plagiarism is identified?
Turnitin is just a tool: it does not make any 'decisions' about students or their
work. Rather, it provides information for members of academic staff to review
any work that contains copied text, checking that this is referenced correctly and
not presented as a student's own work. All submissions will normally contain at
least some matches to the Turnitin database, e.g. properly cited quotes, or items
in the bibliography. There is no set percentage up to which Turnitin matches
may be allowed or not allowed – in all cases, it is up to staff to check whether
citations are legitimate or whether work has been plagiarised. Should potential
plagiarism be identified, this will be followed up through LSHTM’s Assessment

40

Irregularities procedures. If you would like to know more, information about
Turnitin is available at www.turnitin.com/regions/uk.

D. Tips to help you avoid plagiarism and other assessment irregularities
D.1. Leave enough time for the research process
Many students underestimate the amount of time it takes to find and obtain
sufficient high-quality resources. Particularly when conducting a research
project, you will usually be expected to read and digest information from a wide
variety of sources before writing your thesis. When students are pushed for
time, they are far more likely to be tempted to plagiarise. As a rule of thumb,
estimate how long the research process will take and triple it.
D.2. Use clear note taking techniques
When taking notes from a source, ensure you clearly mark the words you copy
directly by placing them in quotation marks, highlighting them, or in other ways
making them distinct from notes in your own words. If you do copy directly from
the source, copy it exactly as published, including all punctuation and
formatting.
Ensure you copy the full citation information of the source on any notes you
make. Many journals include the source details in the header or footer of an
article but books rarely do, so keep page number and chapter information with
any quotes you copy.
D.3. Keep an up-to-date list of your potential sources
Keep a working list of the sources you have found during your research. As well
as assisting you in compiling your bibliography at the end of your thesis, this will
also allow you to keep track of which sources you have read and which you have
discarded and why. Using a reference management software package, as
described in Chapter 2, can be a powerful tool to keep track of sources you have
identified and found useful, as well as providing a quick and easy way to insert
citations and references into your final submission.

41

Chapter 4: Recognising the contribution of others
Any individual work you submit for assessment at LSHTM should be based on
your own ideas and judgments, expressed in your own words, and supported by
appropriately-referenced use of the work of others – as described in Chapter 2.
However, it can be appropriate (particularly for significant pieces of work like
MSc projects) to receive further support and input from other sources, for
example:
•

advice from your tutor or supervisor on academic content;

•

help from technical experts regarding areas like laboratory procedures or
statistical methods;

•

assistance with fieldwork, e.g. where others have collected data on your
behalf;

•

or suggestions about writing style or language use from peers, friends or
family.

In certain cases, particularly for some MSc projects or research degree projects,
you may be undertaking work towards your LSHTM degree that forms part of a
larger professional research study. Such studies may be carried out under the
aegis of LSHTM, or another research institution, or a government, or an NGO, or
even (for students studying part-time or by distance learning) your employer. In
such cases you will need to have your own defined sub-set of work, so it can be
clearly assessed; but you are also likely to need to collaborate closely with
others, including having the scope of your work set out by the ‘Principal
Investigator’ (PI).
This chapter describes how to indicate and acknowledge all such contributions
from others towards your assessed work.

A. Principles for acknowledging input from others
To be able to mark all work fairly, markers should always be made aware of
any support or input you have received from other people.
•

All assistance received from others should be clearly specified, to
distinguish the main body of work done by yourself from any other
supporting/enabling work where you have had help.

42

•

Any additional resources made available to you should also be clearly
specified – for example, to make clear where a dataset has been provided
to you for analysis (as opposed to you collecting the data yourself).

•

Such input and support should be indicated at the relevant points
throughout your work.

•

For major pieces of work, you should also give appropriate credit in an
Acknowledgements section.

•

Acknowledgements can be given anonymously (e.g. referring to help from
a supervisor, other academic staff member, fellow-student, friend or a
family member) rather than by name. The aim is to indicate the type and
level of input received, rather than from whom.

A.1. Marking of work
Assessments that you are set as part of your LSHTM studies will make clear what
kind of work you are expected to do and how much time and effort this is
expected to take. Criteria may also clarify what types of input it may be
appropriate to get from others.
Work will not be ‘marked down’ for receiving additional support in a particular
area, provided this is appropriately acknowledged and is in line with the
assessment criteria – meaning that your own contribution to the work meets
what is expected. Conversely, please be aware that work you do that goes
beyond what is required for the assessment will not be rewarded with extra
marks – you can be marked only against what is in the assessment criteria.
However, if information about support or input you received is incorrect or
omitted, this may be subject to penalties under LSHTM’s assessment irregularity
procedures.
To give two examples:
•

If you want to do a piece of work that requires a qualified member of staff
to carry out a specific laboratory procedure, this should be fine provided
the total work you do, e.g. design of experiment and subsequent analysis,
is of an equivalent amount to that of other students who may be doing
their own lab work. However, if your final submission does not specify
which elements of your assessment have been assisted by others, you
may be penalised.

•

If you are working on something that is part of a larger research initiative
and elements of your work have been designed or prescribed by the
Principal Investigator, this should be made clear in your submission and
less detail would need to be given on those elements. However, if this is
43

not made clear then such work may be penalised or marked down – e.g.
for misrepresentation, or for having given insufficient detail about work
otherwise assumed to have been done by you.
A.2. Group work
In some cases, you may be part of a team when undertaking assessed work.
Arrangements may require a single joint submission from the group, separate
individual submissions (typically drawing on the work of the group but allowing
you to give your own interpretation or additional input), or a combination of
joint and separate submissions.
Joint submissions must constitute the work of the group and should normally be
based on roughly equal contributions from all members – although some
variation in contributions may be reasonable and may be spelt out. Any input
from others (such as guidance from a staff member) should be clearly
acknowledged.
Individual submissions should make clear what work was done, or conclusions
were reached, by the group, and differentiate this from any further individual
work done by you separately.

B. Proof-reading and help with writing or language
B.1. Proof-reading and advice from others
Proof-reading means checking for any grammar, punctuation or spelling errors.
Spell-checking or grammar-checking software (as included in most wordprocessing packages) is a tool which you should always use; but remember that
there are many issues that software cannot spot, like incorrect use of specialist
or technical terms. Therefore, re-reading and checking things in person
remains important.
Whatever your standard of English, you should always proof-read your work
before sending it anywhere, even in draft form, and correct any obvious errors
before submission. If markers see persistent evidence of writing that
demonstrates insufficient attention to accuracy, this may cause you to be
marked down.
After checking your draft yourself, it can then be appropriate to ask other people
– e.g. a fellow student, family member or friend – to proof-read it or give
comments on your choice of words. You may ask a peer who knows the
academic subject area (e.g. a fellow student) to give comments on the content.
However, you must always make the final decision about what is included and
44

how it is expressed, as well as ensuring your final submission acknowledges any
assistance you have received.
You should not have anyone else edit or rewrite your assessed work for you in
such a way that the language no longer represents your own expression of the
work done, or so that a person other than yourself has made decisions about
the content or presentation of the work put forward. In particular, you should be
aware that the use of 'professional' (paid) editors is strongly discouraged by
LSHTM.
B.2. Proof-reading and copy-editing for research degrees theses
For research degree theses (PhD, DrPH or MPhil), in addition to the above,
further expectations apply to the standard of writing expected. Submitted theses
should be structured and of a sufficient standard of English to be ready for
academic publication without needing any further editorial corrections by a third
party.
‘Proof-reading’ is checking a manuscript prior to publication / printing, to
identify any grammar, punctuation and spelling errors requiring correction –
which should then be done by the author. ‘Copy-editing’ is the process of
checking/revising a manuscript against a prescribed style (in terms of paper size,
page layout, fonts, heading styles, word count, pagination, sequential numbering
of tables etc.) and making alterations as necessary to ensure consistency and
remove any duplicated content.
Proof-reading and copy-editing are both skilful processes which require good
English language proficiency, but not specialist subject knowledge. You as the
author may proof-read and copy-edit your own work; or ask someone else to do
so for you, provided you acknowledge them. If a third party proof-reads or copyedits your work, they should be reviewing or correcting the surface text of the
document – not altering textual meaning or the accuracy of data.
While LSHTM discourages the use of professional or paid editors, research
degree theses are the one form of work (given their length and complexity)
where this may sometimes be appropriate. If so, you as a research degree
student will be responsible for making any arrangements, in consultation with
your supervisor, and for any associated costs such as fees. LSHTM’s policy is that
any proof-reading or copy-editing by third parties, whether paid or unpaid, must
be acknowledged in a declaration included in the submitted thesis and available
to the examiners.
You as the student are responsible for ensuring that any third-party
contributions have not introduced changes to the intellectual content or
substance of the thesis. Note that if third-party input introduces any deficiencies
45

in the work, use of a third-party cannot be accepted as a mitigating circumstance
affecting the outcome of the thesis examination.

C. Giving acknowledgements
You should always acknowledge all input or assistance which has had a material
impact on your work. This may include:
•

Any specific input from other people – e.g. editing, proofreading, specific
academic advice or ideas, general advice or ideas such as on structuring
your work, assistance with collecting data in the field or in a lab, technical
support, translation services, etc.

•

Any specific permissions you were granted for your work – e.g. for use of
copyrighted material, use of a specific dataset, use of a patented process,
etc.

•

Any financial assistance or equivalent support – especially any funding or
grants which have supported the work done, but also things like access to
facilities or resources which might not have been automatically available.

C.1. Including an Acknowledgements section
For extended pieces of work, it will often be appropriate to include an
Acknowledgements section.
In addition to the types of input or assistance listed above (section C.), you
should always indicate the following types of assistance, if received, under a subheading of ‘Formal acknowledgements’:
•

The input of your supervisor or tutor, and any co-supervisors or technical
advisors where appropriate – especially where local support and
collaboration has been given either overseas or at another institution.

Acknowledgement may be given in a form like ‘my supervisor’ or ‘my tutor’ rather
than using individual staff names; or they may be named if more appropriate.
You may also wish to recognise and express appreciation of other people who
contributed in ways which did not directly change your work, under a subheading of ‘Personal acknowledgements’.
•

This may include family, friends, staff or others – e.g. to thank them for
encouragement, support, motivation, inspiration or similar. Who and what
you choose to include under this is completely up to you.

46

•

However, to help ensure the anonymity of assessed work, it is generally
better to express thanks to ‘my family’ or to friends using first names only.

In terms of style, you can write an acknowledgements section however you like.
It is best to keep it clear and simple and short, e.g. thanking each specific
person/group for the specific input/assistance received.
In an extended piece of work that includes an acknowledgements section, this
should normally be placed towards the end – either before or after the reference
list. You may take a different approach if you prefer, e.g. listing copyright
permissions in a separate section with its own heading, or mentioning
translation services at the point in your text where you make use of the
translated work. In some cases, you may wish to give important
acknowledgements or a dedication in a very brief note after the Title page at the
start of the work; this should normally be no more than two or three lines.
C.2. Research participants
Where you have undertaken primary research with human subjects or
participants, it is customary to thank them in the acknowledgements section.
This should normally be done anonymously, i.e. simply thanking them as a
group. It is vital to ensure that you fully understand any ethics-related
obligations that apply to you regarding anonymity and confidentiality. For
example, any interviewees should have given consent for how they may be
named and quoted, and should typically be referred to as anonymous
individuals, e.g. 'Respondent A', throughout the work.
If you will be working with research participants, please ensure you are
completely familiar with LSHTM’s rigorous ethical requirements regarding such
activities, including how they should be written up.
C.3. Additional requirements
Note that for specific items of assessment – particularly MSc project reports and
Research Degree theses – students may need to complete additional specific
forms, e.g. to reiterate that the work presented in the thesis is their own, or to
acknowledge and describe the contributions of others.

47

Chapter 5: Copyright and intellectual property
Note – for MSc students, some of the information in this chapter will be
duplicated in your project handbook. For research degrees students, these
issues may be more complex and you should follow advice given in the research
degree handbook.
Further guidance and help can be found on the Library, Archive & Open
Research Services’ intranet pages at Copyright (sharepoint.com) and specific
queries can be sent through the ServiceDesk..

A. LSHTM policies for student work
As well as ensuring that you correctly reference everything you make use of in
your work, you also need to be sure that you are allowed to make use of the
work of others – being aware of any copyright or intellectual property rights that
may apply. You should be certain about whether any restrictions may apply in
the way you communicate, disseminate or even publish work that you have
produced based on that of others.
A.1. Copyright and intellectual property rights
The issues can be defined as follows:
•

Copyright subsists in any original work (or part of that work) from the
moment it is created. The rights holder (usually the author, but in some
cases the employer) is granted certain rights which are protected by law
over how the work may be used - this includes copying.

•

Intellectual property (IP) is an intangible asset whose broadest scope
covers all types of knowledge, but which is generally focused on patents,
know-how, copyright, trademarks, brand names, designs and secrets.
Most forms of IP can be protected legally (with the exception of know-how
and secrets) and the resulting proprietary rights are referred to as
intellectual property rights (IPR).

The copyright of work you produce during your studies at LSHTM will normally
legally belong to you as the author of the work. There may sometimes be
exceptions, however – usually if this is research work subject to the terms and
conditions of a specific agreement.
If you are making use of the work of others, their copyrights and intellectual
property rights also need to be carefully respected. This may apply not just to

48

written work, but to other forms of work carried out by third parties – e.g. data
collected, photographs taken, diagrams drawn, computer code written, etc.
If you are unfamiliar with these issues, please look through the introductory
guidance on the Library, Archive & Open Research Services’ intranet pages at
Copyright (sharepoint.com) .
A.2. Copyright and IPR agreements for major work
For any significant pieces of work, e.g. MSc research projects, you should ensure
that you discuss copyright and IPR with your tutor, supervisor or another
relevant member of staff – both before embarking on substantive work, and as
you complete writing-up.
Copyright or IPR agreements will not be necessary for most LSHTM student
work, but may be appropriate in some cases – particularly:
•

To clearly assign and specify ownership of IPR for data collected during
the course of a research project (e.g. in the lab with help from LSHTM
staff; or in the field, working with an external organisation).

•

To clarify permissions given for use of data or other copyrighted materials
provided by LSHTM or an outside party – which will usually remain the
copyright property of the original party even where incorporated in your
project report.

Where research funding is provided by an external sponsor, a specific contract
will normally apply; contract terms may often assign ownership of copyright or
IPR to the sponsor, or impose specific restrictions such as on publication.
Similarly, where your work is to be undertaken in collaboration with an external
organisation (e.g. working with their staff or at their facilities), it is very helpful to
reach a clear agreement with them before you begin about the copyright and IPR
of the results. This can avoid problems later on, e.g. if you or they want to do
something specific with the work.
Likewise, where LSHTM staff (such as your supervisor) have supplied data or
other key elements of your project and own the corresponding copyright or
intellectual property rights, the position of both parties should be set out in a
specific agreement. Standard LSHTM templates are available for such
agreements between student and supervisor and may be edited as appropriate
to create a specific agreement for each individual piece of work. Your
Programme Administrator should be able to give advice. Once agreed, a copy of
the final signed statement should be lodged with your Programme Administrator
to be kept in your student file. You are also encouraged to keep a copy for your
own records.

49

A.3. Copyright that otherwise applies to your work as a student
Unless you have signed a specific agreement to the contrary, the copyright that
applies to your work as a student (including your final project report) is retained
by you as the author.
A.4. Intellectual Property Rights – LSHTM policy
All students must notify LSHTM, through their supervisor, of any invention,
device, material, product, method or process, computer software or other
potentially valuable result which it is considered might have industrial or
technical significance, whether patentable or not, developed or invented during
the course of a students' research or study whilst a registered student of LSHTM
and make assignment of their rights to LSHTM.
It would be unusual for student work on taught programmes to generate
significant new intellectual property meriting such notification. However, this
may potentially be more relevant for research degree students.
A.5. Setting restrictions on access to your work
LSHTM’s standard policy sets a standard right of access to student project
reports for purposes of study and research. In rare cases, you (or external
organisations or funders you are working with) may wish to restrict such access
by others, e.g. not wishing to have your final project report placed in the LSHTM
Library.
A restriction of access might typically be requested in relation to exploitation of
the research or pending a patent application. It may only be granted by special
permission of LSHTM to a maximum period of 2 years.
Restriction will not normally be granted except where the work is said to contain
sensitive or confidential material or material that would infringe the rights of
third-party holders of copyright.

B. Publication of student work
Work done as an LSHTM student may sometimes result in papers published in
peer reviewed journals. Where work is to be submitted for publication, issues
related to both authorship and obtaining copyright/IPR permissions need to be
considered along with academic affiliation.

50

B.1. Authorship
The standard criteria for authorship should be observed. As detailed above, you
as a student will normally be the copyright owner and primary author of your
project report. However, considerations of secondary authorship may come into
play if your work is to be published – especially if:
•

the project was done in close collaboration with others (e.g. working
closely with a supervisor in the lab); or

•

made use of notable contributions from others (e.g. statistical analysis
carried out by a technical advisor and acknowledged as such); or

•

was done as part of a larger programme of collaborative work (e.g. where
your work was on a particular element within a larger field trial).

In such cases you may often need to credit others, e.g. your supervisor, as coauthors. Indeed, in cases where your work formed part of a larger study, it is
likely that your supervisor or Principal Investigator would be the ‘lead’ author for
any published work, with student contributors more likely to be listed as coauthors. LSHTM staff members should be credited as a co-author only where
their contribution to the paper justifies it. For the purposes of clarity, LSHTM
staff include distance learning and London based staff.
As set out below, where an LSHTM staff member has made a sufficient
contribution to be named as a co-author they will need to be willing to act as a
guarantor of the content and the integrity of the paper.
To help understand who should be credited as an author, the following notes
have been compiled from guidance on the International Committee of Medical
Journal Editors website, www.icmje.org.
•

All persons designated as authors should qualify for authorship, and all
those who qualify should be listed.

•

Authorship credit should be based only on (1) substantial contributions to
conception and design, or acquisition of data, or analysis and
interpretation of data; (2) drafting the article or revising it critically for
important intellectual content; (3) final approval of the version to be
published; and (4) willingness to be accountable for work accuracy and
integrity, and resolution of any concerns. Conditions 1, 2, 3 and 4 must all
be met. Acquisition of funding, the collection of data, or general
supervision of the research group, by themselves, do not justify
authorship.

51

•

Authors should provide a description of what each contributed; some
journals publish that information. All others who contributed to the work
who are not authors should be named in the Acknowledgments, and what
they did should be described.

•

Increasingly, authorship of multi-centre trials is attributed to a group. All
members of the group who are named as authors should fully meet the
above criteria for authorship. Group members who do not meet these
criteria should be listed, with their permission, in the Acknowledgments or
in an appendix.

•

The order in which authors are listed on the byline should be a joint
decision of the co-authors.

B.2. Obtaining copyright permissions for publication
If your work contains properly cited textual quotations from the published work
of others, although the original authors will retain the copyright of their material
you will not normally be required to seek permission to quote them.
However, if your work contains any substantive or non-textual material that is
the work of others – in particular, tables and figures (including photographs,
diagrams, graphs and charts) – then you will usually need to obtain specific
permission from the copyright owner(s) to include such items in a publication.
If your work required you to obtain specific permissions – e.g. for use of
copyrighted material, use of a specific dataset, use of a patented process – then
check whether the permission granted was just for use by you as a student, or
also explicitly allows for publication, or sets any further restrictions on
publication. If the original permission granted did not explicitly mention
publication, then you will need to go back and obtain specific further permission
for this.
A guide to copyright is available at LSHTM Research Online.
B.3. Open Access
It is recommended that peer reviewed work produced by LSHTM students is
made available open access. This can be either by payment of a fee to a
publisher (‘gold’ open access), or by archiving a copy of the accepted manuscript
version in LSHTM’s open access repository, Research Online (‘green’ open
access).
For research degree students funded by UKRI (and other large funders), a
requirement of the funding is that published articles must be made open access

52

on publication with a Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) licence (see section
B.4. below).
Further information on making your work available open access can be found on
the Library Sharepoint site.
B.4. Creative Commons licenses
Creative Commons licences are a series of copyright licences that offer certain
usage rights to the public while reserving other rights. If a publication is available
under a Creative Commons licence this will be indicated on the publisher’s
webpage.
You can use material published under a Creative Commons licence in your own
work, without seeking permission, as long as you comply with the terms of the
licence - for example, the original source must be properly cited.
Further information on Creative Commons licences, including applying them to
your own work, can be found on their website.
B.5 Academic Affiliation
Should you choose to publish your thesis developed as part of your studies at
LSHTM you may name your affiliation as a current or former student at LSHTM
as appropriate.

53
