ARTS UNIVERSITY PLYMOUTH

ACADEMIC REGULATIONS FOR
ACADEMIC YEAR 2025/26

CONTENTS
SECTION​

TITLE

1​
2​

INTRODUCTION
QUALIFICATIONS
-​ General
-​ Units and academic credit
-​ Curriculum structure
-​ Extended BA(Hons)/Foundation Year degree courses
-​ Distance Learning
-​ Principles for named courses and awards
ADMISSIONS
-​ General
-​ Accreditation of Prior Learning
REGISTRATION
-​ General conditions
-​ Interruption of studies
-​ Attendance requirement
ASSESSMENT, PROGRESSION AND AWARD OF CREDIT
-​ Purposes and criteria of assessment
-​ Minimum requirements for pass
-​ Submission of assessed work
-​ Provision for viva voce examination
-​ Determining progression and qualification outcomes
-​ Rules regarding failure
-​ First Referral
-​ Second referral by Progression and Award or Resit Board
-​ Repeat
-​ Compensation
-​ Trailing credit
-​ Grading and Classification of Awards except BA Honours Degrees
-​ BA Honours Degree Classification
-​ Exit awards
-​ Posthumous and Aegrotat awards
ACADEMIC MISCONDUCT
EXTENUATING CIRCUMSTANCES
ASSESSMENT RESPONSIBILITIES AND PROCEDURES
EXTERNAL EXAMINERS
ACADEMIC APPEALS AND COMPLAINTS
-​ Complaints and appeals
-​ Grounds for appeal
TRANSCRIPTS, DIPLOMA SUPPLEMENTS AND CERTIFICATES

3​

4​

5​

6​
7​
8​
9​
10​

11​

GLOSSARY
APPENDICES
A.​
B.​
C.​
D.​

LEVEL DESCRIPTORS
ACCREDITATION OF PRIOR LEARNING
ACADEMIC MISCONDUCT POLICY
EXTENUATING CIRCUMSTANCES PROCEDURE

E.​

POWERS AND PROCEDURES RELATING TO UNIT ASSESSMENT BOARDS AND
PROGRESSION AND AWARD BOARDS
EXTERNAL EXAMINERS
APPEALS PROCEDURE
CERTIFICATION OF AWARDS AND SUPPLEMENTARY CERTIFICATION
BOARDS FLOW DIAGRAM

F.​
G.​
H.​
I.​

SUMMARY OF CHANGES FOR THE 2025/26 ACADEMIC YEAR

Inclusion of ‘Foundation Year’ with any reference to Extended BA, to reflect curriculum offer at
Academic Partner institutions
Inclusion of reference to students studying at Academic Partner institutions in relation to Academic
Appeals, Extenuating Circumstances
4.6 Revision of eligibility for course transfers - students only permitted to request change of course at
the end of their first year of study
5.38 Clarification that trailing credit not permitted for Extended BA/Foundation Year
Appendix E - inclusion of Academic Parntership staff at Boards where appropriate
Appendix E - revision of Unit Assessment Board outcomes to reflect current practice

1

SECTION ONE
INTRODUCTION
1.1​
These Academic Regulations (hereafter referred to simply as the Regulations) apply to all
undergraduate and postgraduate taught courses leading to credit or qualification of Arts
University Plymouth (AUP); including those courses delivered at Academic Partner Institutions.
1.2​
The Regulations in force at the time of a student’s annual registration are those for that
academic year unless specified otherwise within the Regulations. When a student registers part
way through an academic year, the student comes under the Regulations in force for that
academic year. When a student resumes study after any period of interruption, the student
comes under the Regulations in force at the time of resumption.
1.3​
These Regulations are referenced in the documentation for each validated course of
study, together with any specific requirements from professional, statutory or regulatory bodies as
agreed in the validation process for the course and approved by Academic Board. The
documentation for each course of study encompasses the course specification and unit
specifications.
1.4​
AUP will make changes to the Regulations where this will assist in the proper delivery of
taught courses. Changes to the Regulations may only be approved through processes approved
by Academic Board and will normally come into effect at the beginning of the next academic year.
The University will only introduce changes during the academic year when it reasonably
considers these to be in the best interests of students or where this is required by legislation or
regulatory authority.
1.5​
Academic Board may approve Emergency Regulations if, due to exceptional
circumstances beyond its reasonable control, the University is unable to apply the approved
Regulations. Emergency Regulations will set out any modifications to the approved Regulations
that apply to students and for the duration as determined by the Vice-Chancellor and the Board of
Governors. The implementation of Emergency Regulations shall not constitute a failure to apply
correctly the relevant approved Regulations and shall therefore not of itself provide valid grounds
for an academic appeal against a decision of a Progression and Award Board.
1.6​
AUP introduced a validated ‘Common Unit Framework’ for implementation in the 2021-22
Academic Year, which applies to all delivery at Levels 4, 5 & 6 (including Extended
BA/Foundation Year). The ‘Common Unit Framework’ was extended to Level 7 for Postgraduate,
Level 7 study for implementation in the 2024-25 Academic Year.

2

SECTION TWO
QUALIFICATIONS
General
2.1​
AUP qualifications shall be approved by Academic Board before a course of
study leading to the qualification may be commenced. Qualifications may only be
awarded to students who have followed and successfully completed a taught course of
study approved by the University.
2.2​
AUP qualifications are defined with reference to the The Frameworks for Higher
Education Qualifications of UK Degree-Awarding Bodies (FHEQ). This framework
provides a set of learning outcomes and skills expected of the holders of AUP awards.
AUP awards and their level within this framework are set out in the table below, with
levels 4, 5 and 6 relating to undergraduate courses and level 7 to postgraduate.
FHEQ
level

Total Credits
Required

Certificate of Higher Education
(CertHE) (exit award)

4

120

120 at level 4

Diploma of Higher Education
(DipHE) (exit award)
Ordinary Bachelor’s degree
(BA) (exit award)

5

240

6

300

120 at level 5; 120 at
level 4
60 at level 6; 120 at level
5; 120 at level 4

Bachelor of Arts with Honours
degree (BA(Hons)

6

360

6

360

Postgraduate Certificate of
Higher Education (exit award)

7

60

120 at level 6; 120 at
level 5
120 at level 4
120 at level 6 plus prior
credit equivalent to 120 at
level 5 and 120 at level 4
60 at level 7

Postgraduate Diploma of
Higher Education (exit award)
Master of Arts degree (MA)

7

120

120 at level 7

7

180

180 at level 7

Master of Fine Art degree
(MFA)

7

120

120 at level 7
(subsequent to
achievement of MA award
180 credits)

Higher Education Award

Top Up Bachelor of Arts with
Honours degree (BA(Hons)

Academic Credit and
FHEQ Level

Units and academic credit
2.3​
All AUP undergraduate and postgraduate taught courses are comprised of units
of study designated to one of the levels in the framework outlined above i.e. level 4, 5,
6 or 7. Units are self-contained blocks of learning with defined aims, learning outcomes
and at least one component of assessment.
2.4​
3

The size of a unit is measured in credits. In accordance with practice across the

UK higher education sector, AUP allocates one credit for 10 hours of notional learning
time. Notional learning time includes all activities required for a student to achieve the
learning outcomes of a unit including contact hours (lectures, demonstrations,
seminars, tutorials etc.), directed study, independent study, and assessment activity
(including preparation). Notional learning time is a benchmark and the actual time
students take to achieve the required outcomes may be shorter or longer depending on
the knowledge and skills of students at entry, their rate of progression through the
course, and the impact of any reasonable adjustments made for students with
impairments.
2.5​
It is important to emphasise that units and the credit assigned to them are
attributed to a single designated FHEQ level - 4, 5, 6 or 7 - and that progression from
lower to higher levels involves study that increases in complexity and therefore
becomes more demanding. As a guide, generic descriptions relating to qualification at
Levels 4, 5 and 6 are contained at Appendix A. Unit assessment is therefore unique to
a given level.
2.6​
For every course, the amount of credit assigned to every unit at the specified
FHEQ level is determined and approved at validation, with the total credits required for
awards as shown in the previous table.
2.7​
It is also important to emphasise that credit is allocated to a learning activity on
the basis of its stated learning outcomes, and that a student will only be assigned credit
after demonstration through assessment of the achievement of the stated learning
outcomes. Credit cannot be assigned if no assessment has taken place or if the
assessment has not been appropriately conducted.
2.8​
A student successfully completing any unit is awarded the full amount of credit
assigned to that unit. The award of credit for the unit indicates the achievement of the
threshold standard or better for the unit. Credit is awarded solely on a pass/fail basis
and all learning outcomes must be passed for the unit to be passed and the credit
awarded. There are no circumstances in which partial credit can be awarded for partial
completion or success in particular components or elements of a unit.
2.9​
Credit is not used for grading, therefore, but quantifies the volume of learning
achieved at a particular level according to the amount of credit accrued. The amount of
credit is independent of the standards in terms of grades awarded. Credit is therefore
used to determine eligibility for progression from one year to the next and, finally, the
type of award that may be made. The standard of achievement is determined by the
amount of marks and the grades awarded through assessment - see section 5)
2.10​ Credit also facilitates transfer between courses and/or institutions by providing
an accessible record of achievement. This is relatively straightforward for transfer
within the UK. For transfer across the European Higher Education Area (EHEA), a
credit transfer agreement is in place that defines UK credit value as twice its European
Credit Transfer System (ECTS) equivalent, meaning 30 AUP credits are worth 15
ECTS credits.
4

Curriculum structure
2.11​ The undergraduate curriculum comprises units of 30 credits, as laid out in the
validated course specification.The postgraduate curriculum comprises units of 60
credits, as laid out in the validated course specification. Some courses may offer
optional units.
2.12​ The development of skills and experience to promote transition to a
professional career is a fundamental part of course design and delivery, with a
commitment to strong industry and professional links, external collaborations and
partnerships activities. The use of live or simulated project briefs offer the benefits of
professional currency to enrich academic study. Learning, teaching and assessment is
designed to support students in developing the essential transferable skills (e.g.
communication, presentation, team-working) in preparation for successful professional
careers.The design of the Common Unit Framework embeds Graduate Attributes
(GAs), Digital Literacy (DL) and Employability Skills (ES) into curriculum delivery and
assessment strategies alongside an integrated approach for the development of
academic and information literacy.
2.13​ The potential for student (and staff) exchange with higher education providers in
other countries is permitted, primarily through opportunities in Europe but also further
afield through institutional collaborative relationships. In such circumstances, learning
agreements specify the academic requirements and academic credits involved, under
the umbrella of recognised exchange schemes; or via overarching institutional
exchange agreements; or through the Common Unit Framework.
Extended BA(Hons)/Foundation Year degree courses
2.14​ AUP offers 4-year degree courses through Extended BA(Hons)/Foundation
Year courses in named awards. The Extended BA entry year delivers to all students
embarking on a 4 year extended course, taught at Level 4 with units common to all
students. Performance in units is assessed at 0-100%, with a pass (40% or above)
required in each unit to pass the year and be eligible for progression into BA(Hons)
Year 1, joining the majority of students who enter directly at this point. There is no
credit attached to the Extended BA/Foundation year.
Distance Learning
2.15​ AUP can also offer 3 year degree courses via distance learning. Any distance
learning courses are required to conform to the regulations set out in 2.16 to 2.19,
applicable for all approved courses of study.
Principles for named courses and awards
2.16​ All approved courses of study are related to a unique named award, and titles
accord with the normal expectations of higher education, relevant professional bodies,
students and employers about the level of knowledge and skills to be expected from a
person holding such a qualification.
5

2.17​ Subject to certain qualifying conditions, students who do not achieve their target
qualification will normally be offered an intermediate exit award which reflects the
volume and level of credit they have successfully achieved during their period of study.
Students will normally be considered for an exit award if they are withdrawing from
AUP, and have completed the requisite credit (see section 5).
2.18​ Courses are designed in accordance with the general requirements for credit,
and any requirements specific to that course which students will have to meet in order
to qualify for the award will be clearly stipulated. Postgraduate courses may
acknowledge distinctive performance; and undergraduate awards are normally
classified, with unclassified awards only available as exit (ordinary) awards.
2.19​ The process for the design, approval, amendment, review and withdrawal of
unit and course specifications is set out in AUP procedures for Validation, course
Review and the withdrawal of Higher Education courses. A unit or course must be
approved through processes approved by Academic Board before it may be delivered.

6

SECTION THREE
ADMISSIONS
General
3.1​
The recruitment and admission of students to AUP courses is governed by the
Admissions Policy, made widely available from the University website. Students registering
for courses must have satisfied the admissions criteria.
3.2​
To be eligible for admission to a course or stand-alone unit, an applicant has to satisfy
AUP’s entry requirements as outlined in the Admissions Policy. Equivalent learning from
other study or experience may meet entry requirements. All applicants must demonstrate
sufficient competency in English language to be able to study successfully for the proposed
award as outlined in the Admissions Policy.
3.3​
In line with the Admissions Policy, applicants are asked to declare any unspent
criminal convictions, and ongoing or pending criminal proceedings as part of the online
enrolment and registration process. In accordance with the Disciplinary Procedures for
Students, students are required to inform the Registry of any criminal proceedings and
convictions that may arise once registered as a student.
3.4​
Any complaints with regard to the University’s admissions process should be
directed in the first instance to the Admissions Office (admissions@aup.ac.uk), telephone
01752 203434) and will be dealt with under the University Complaints guidelines, available
from the AUP website. There is no right of appeal against an admission decision about
matters of academic judgement regarding an applicant’s suitability to study a course.
Appeals against a decision not to admit an applicant to a course of study are restricted to
those that cite irregularity in the decision-making process.
Accreditation of Prior Learning
3.5​
Accreditation of Prior Learning (APL) is defined as the formal recognition of prior
learning gained elsewhere to enable a student to be admitted to a course or for
admission with credit whereby the credit may be counted towards the requirements for a
AUP course.
3.6​
APL has to relate to the course an applicant wishes to study at AUP. It has to be at
the relevant HE level. The claim can be based on prior certificated learning, prior
experiential learning or a combination of the two. APL is based on the concept of specific
credit i.e. that the learning outcomes of the prior learning are directly equivalent to those of
the units from which the student will be exempt as a result. However, credit for prior
learning may also be awarded if the prior learning supports the achievement of the relevant
course learning outcomes but does not match exactly the specific content of units
contributing to the course. In all cases, the experiential and/or certificated learning must be
considered relevant in terms of currency.

7

3.7​

The maximum amount of credit that may be awarded through APL is as follows:

BA (Hons) Extended Degree/ Foundation
Year

not applicable

Certificate of Higher Education

60 credits

Diploma of Higher Education

120 credits

Honours Degree

240 credits (Level 4 and 5 only)

Postgraduate Certificate

30 credits

Postgraduate Diploma

60 credits

Master of Arts Degree

120 credits (otherwise 60 credits
required to be studied through the
MA final major project at AUP)

3.8​
​

It should be noted that:
●​

●​
●​

●​

APL is not permitted for level 6 units for students entering directly into level 6
of BA (Hons) awards, other than in meeting the entry criteria of 240 credits
prior certificated learning e.g. from verified Diploma of Higher Education,
Foundation Degree, Higher National Diploma, or equivalent
APL is not permitted for Master of Fine Art (MFA) degrees, (other than in
meeting the entry criteria of a verified MA award in a relevant discipline)
an applicant who has already gained an Honours degree or an equivalent level
6 qualification may be granted up to one third exemption of the total credit
value towards another equivalent or lower qualification as defined by the
FHEQ
an applicant who has already gained a Taught Master’s degree may be
granted up to one third of the total credit value towards another equivalent or
lower qualification as defined by the FHEQ.

3.9​
Where it is agreed that certificated prior learning to which credits are attached may
contribute towards a final award, agreement of APL must be accompanied by agreement for
including the credits either in their original or amended form in the student record.
3.10​ Further guidance and procedures regarding Accreditation of Prior Learning are
contained at Appendix B.

8

SECTION FOUR
REGISTRATION
General conditions
4.1.​ All students must register at the beginning of their course of study and subsequently
as required, normally at the start of a new academic year. The maximum period of
registration for courses is normally 3 years longer than the planned duration of the course of
study. All courses are offered through either full time or part time study with the latter
normally organised so that as near as possible half the full time academic credits are
attempted each part time year.
4.2.​ If unit choices apply, new students will be required to complete any unit choices by
the time specified in the course handbook, and continuing students will be required to
complete unit choices for the next year before the end of the existing standard teaching
year.
4.3.​ Students who wish to interrupt (defer) or withdraw from their course of study must
submit a request via the Student Portal, for processing by the Registry team. The
Progression and Award Board will consider any achievement gained by the student and
issue the appropriate award and transcript. Partner Insitutions will operate their own
arrangements for processing deferrals and withdrawals, with regular reporting to AUP for
record keeping purposes.
4.4.​ The minimum period of registration for all undergraduate courses and awards is one
academic year. The minimum period of registration for all postgraduate courses and awards
is equivalent to the period required to achieve one half of the total credits for the intended
award.
4.5.​ A student may change their mode of study (from full-time to part-time or vice versa)
where alternative modes are validated and in operation. Students who wish to change their
mode of study must submit a request via the Student Portal, for processing by the Registry
team. Students may normally only change between modes of study at the start of a level,
although exceptions will be made where this would be in the student’s interest, for example
due to accessibility or specialised support requirements. Normally only one transfer of mode
is permitted for any student.
4.6.​ Students may also transfer between courses. Students wishing to transfer to another
degree course are required to consult initially with both their current Course Leader and the
Course Leader of the course they wish to transfer to.There is no automatic entitlement to
transfer, and approval will be based on suitability of the candidate and space on the new
course. Where the request is agreed the student must submit a request via the Student
Portal, for processing by the Registry.
Transfers will normally take place at the end of the first year of study (or Extended BA/Foundation
Year). Transfers within the year, or in years 2 and 3 should only be considered in the most
9

exceptional of circumstances, for example due to accessibility or additional support requirements.
Students are only permitted to transfer courses once during their period of registration.
4.7.​ A student will remain registered for the maximum period of the award, or until they
have achieved the award or the registration has been terminated, whichever comes first.
4.8.​

A student’s registration may be terminated if the student has:
●​

●​

●​
●​
●​
●​

been judged to have breached the Student Code of Conduct in such a
severe manner that recommendation for withdrawal has been approved in
accordance with the Disciplinary Procedures for Students
been judged unsafe or beyond the capacity of the University to be safely
supported for study under application of the Support for Study
Procedures
exhausted all opportunities to remedy failure or has made insufficient
progress through their course of study at the required stage
formally notified the institution that they wish to discontinue and withdraw
from their studies
failed to comply with their financial commitment to AUP in payment of tuition
fees, in accordance with the AUP Student Debt Policy
failed to attend for a period in excess of 6 weeks and failed to respond to
requests to engage with the University, in accordance with AUP HE
Attendance Policy

Interruption of Studies
4.9.​ A student may request in writing to the Registry to take a study break for a maximum
period of 12 months, for reasons of ill health or other extenuating circumstances, or be
required to do so under Support for Study or Student Disciplinary procedures. This may be
extended in exceptional circumstances for a further year. Students who are required to
interrupt their studies for health reasons will be required to provide evidence that they are fit
to resume their studies before returning.
4.10.​ No student may interrupt their studies for a period of longer than two years. If the
student does not return to the course after 2 years, they will be deemed to have withdrawn.
Return by a student after a longer break is permissible, but only through making a new
application under approved Admissions procedures.
Attendance requirement
4.11.​ AUP expects that students attend 100% of timetabled hours and arrive punctually at
the beginning of each timetabled session. Attendance is monitored on a regular basis and if
there is attendance of 50% or less for four weeks students will be subject to a review
process which could lead to sanctions being applied and payment of any bursaries or
scholarships being affected. However, personal and unavoidable circumstances will always
be taken into consideration. The University’s HE Attendance & Engagement Policy is made
available to students through the Student Portal and Student Handbook.
10

SECTION FIVE
ASSESSMENT, PROGRESSION AND AWARD OF CREDIT
Purposes and criteria of assessment
5.1.​
●​
●​
●​

The purposes of assessment are to:
objectively measure a student’s achievements against the learning outcomes of the
unit
assist student learning by providing appropriate feedback on performance
provide a reliable and consistent basis for the recommendation of an appropriate
award

5.2.​ Each unit will have a clear statement of summative assessment criteria and
methodology appropriate to its level, learning outcomes and length of study, and a timetable
for assessment. This is set out in unit specification forms. The summative assessment
criteria represent the evidence to be produced to demonstrate that the learning outcomes for
the unit have been achieved. This may take a variety of forms (e.g. artefact(s), a written
paper, a presentation, a research file). Assessment may be made holistically taking all
submitted work into account against the learning outcomes, or may be made for each
individual component of submitted work. Additionally, particular assessment tasks may be
weighted to emphasise their significance. In all cases, the method of assessment must be
defined and stated clearly.
In the case of University closure through response to disasters and/or national emergencies,
and ensuing disruption to teaching and assessment, adjustments to summative assessment
criteria may be implemented where it is not possible for students to complete the original
work as specified in the unit specification. Adjustments to the assessment criteria will be
developed and communicated as swiftly as possible to affected students through a revised
Unit Guide as part of plans to mitigate adverse impact by ensuring students are able to
demonstrate the learning outcomes in alternative ways.
5.3.​ Summative assessment criteria and assessment methodology must be specified
prior to the start of the unit within the approved unit brief.
5.4.​ Appropriate adjustments may be made to the learning and teaching experience as
required to take account of disclosed disabilities. Any reasonable adjustments made for
assessment are to be reported to the relevant Unit Assessment Board.
5.5.​

11

All learning outcomes must be passed to successfully complete a unit.

Minimum requirements for pass
5.6.​ Students are required to complete all parts of the course’s approved
assessment and comply with all regulations relating to their course of study. The
minimum pass marks for AUP assessments, units, stages and qualifications are:
●​
●​

40% for undergraduate courses
50% for postgraduate courses.

5.7.​ A student who fails a unit and is referred will normally be required to re-submit only
the element(s) of the unit which have been failed. A student who fails and is required to
repeat a unit will normally be required to repeat all elements.
Submission of assessed work
5.8.​ Work submitted for a summative assessment component cannot be amended
after submission, or re-submission.
5.9.​ Student requests for extensions to assessment deadlines must be made only in
accordance with AUP Extenuating Circumstances Procedures (see Section 7).
5.10.​ Where coursework is submitted late and there are no accepted extenuating
circumstances, the grade will be capped at the pass mark - 40% for Undergraduate and
50% for Postgraduate.
5.11.​ Students who fail to submit work for assessments or attend examinations shall be
deemed to have failed the assessments concerned and will not receive a grade, with
confirmation of details for any further attempt following the relevant Progression and
Award Board.
5.12.​ Extensions to deadlines for submission of coursework may not be granted by
members of academic staff. Extensions to deadlines are only made for valid extenuating
circumstances, for which students must apply in accordance with these Regulations.
Where situations arise that dictate the need for the University to award Extenuating
Circumstances for all students or all students in any particular cohort, leading to a
common deadline extension, there is no requirement for students to apply for this
individually (e.g. response to disasters and/or national emergencies).
5.13.​ Students with valid extenuating circumstances will not be penalised for late
submission. Where an extenuating circumstances claim is deemed invalid, submitted work
will be managed in line with paras 5.10 and 5.11 above. In the meantime, feedback may be
given on the quality of the work submitted and an indicative grade provided, subject to the
outcome of the claim.
5.14.​

All assessments will be marked on a percentage scale of 0-100.

5.15.​ The final grade for an individual assessment component will be determined after
12

completion of all processes defined in AUP Assessment and Moderation Procedures
encompassing first, second and third marking (where required), and moderation.
5.16.​ If the result of any overall assessment calculation creates a mark of 0.5% or greater,
this will be rounded up to the next full percentage point (e.g. 69.5% is rounded to 70; 59.5%
to 60%; and so on). Where the calculation creates a mark below 0.5%, this will be rounded
down to the next full percentage point (e.g. 69.4% is rounded to 69%; 59.4% to 59%; and so
on). For the purposes of rounding up or down, only the first decimal place is used.
Provision for viva voce examination
5.17.​ Exceptionally, viva voce examinations may be conducted under procedures relating
to Academic Misconduct (Appendix C) as an additional assessment in determining whether
a student has committed misconduct.
Determining progression and qualification outcomes
5.18.​ The paths through which students are required to progress through any course and
the elements identified as compulsory or optional are set out in the approved course
specification. Each of the stages of an undergraduate course consists of a total of 120
credits. In cases where courses are not divided into stages (for example, postgraduate
courses) the provisions below apply to the whole course.
5.19.​ In order to complete and pass a stage of a course, a student must acquire the total
number of credits set out in the course specification at the approved qualification level for
the award. The exception to this rule is restricted to circumstances detailed further below
covering compensation for marginal failure.
5.20.​ If a student studies more than the number of credits required in the level, the
Progression and Award Board will consider the marks of the best credits falling within the
course specification and up to the number required for completion of the level (subject to
any core/prerequisite requirements) in considering decisions on progression.
5.21.​

Units which have been successfully completed cannot be reassessed.

Rules regarding failure
5.22.​ A student will be permitted a maximum of three attempts at a unit. A failed unit
may therefore not be resat or repeated on more than two occasions.
5.23.​
●​
●​
●​
13

Where a student fails a unit, the following may apply:
Referral - this means a second/third attempt of assessment component(s) within a
unit, following failure at first/second attempt
Repeat - this means repeating the year of study and submitting new work for
units previously failed (UG only)
Compensation - the award of credit by the Progression and Award Board for a

●​

failed unit(s) for which compensation may be awarded on account of good
performance in other units at the same credit level where the learning outcomes
have been met (UG only)
Trailing credit - this is where the Progression and Award Board allows progression
of a student to the next stage without award the full 120 credits, on an exceptional
basis and subject to specific conditions. (UG only)

First referral
5.24.​ Referral gives a student an additional opportunity to undertake work equivalent to the
failed assessment component(s) of a unit. This involves the completion of additional work or
the repeat of the component(s) in order to secure the learning outcomes of the failed unit.
Referral is available for all failed units, except where a student has been barred from
undertaking a re-assessment as a penalty for academic misconduct.
5.25.​ Referral will normally take place at the point of failure (i.e. the unmoderated
notification of unit results). The time allowed for re-assessment will in all cases be
standard, agreed centrally and consistent across all awards.
5.26.​ The Unit Assessment Board must confirm that submitted work for referral is
satisfactory before credit can be awarded. This confirmation will be given as soon as
possible, and students will be notified of the date their results will be available. Successful
completion of a referral for any assessment component gains a pass mark of 40% for the
unit. Where the referral mark does not improve upon the previous mark, the previous mark
will stand.
5.27.​ If the unit has not been passed, the student will normally be offered a further and
final referral opportunity by the Progression and Award Board unless other factors (such as
the student’s overall balance of failure) exclude this under the regulations (see below).
5.28.​

Referral work may be subject to the terms of Compensation (see 5.36).

Second referral by Progression and Award or Resit Board
5.29.​ Second referral provides an option to provide a student with one final opportunity to
retrieve a failed unit. This may be offered by the Progression and Award Board, on the
recommendation of the Unit Assessment Board, to enable a student to meet the
requirements for progression or award. In determining its recommendation, the Unit
Assessment Board will consider the overall profile of the student as indicated by the unit
results achieved. The Board may consider evidence about how the student has engaged
with the course, including patterns of attendance and the submission of work, for example if
a student has failed to submit any work for assessment in a unit on both previous occasions
(submission and first referral). To permit continuous study, and direct progression to the next
academic level, second referrals will normally be offered only up to a maximum of 30 credits.
To ensure consistency of approach, the deadline for all re-takes will be set centrally by the
University, and will apply to all students.
14

5.30.​ Where the Board considers that the work is not retrievable before the start of the
next academic level, or where 60 credits are outstanding, the student will normally be
required to repeat (as below), or retake the failed units without attendance, as determined
by the Board. This includes situations where work is outstanding following deferral (e.g.
approved extenuating circumstances resulting in first attempt being considered at Resit
Board), and is intended to ensure that a student is not overburdened during the next level of
study.
5.31.​ Where a student has achieved fewer than 60 credits, normally the student will be
deemed to have failed the year without opportunity to retrieve failed units, resulting in the
termination of studies. However, exceptionally, the student may be offered the opportunity to
repeat the year.
5.32.​ Progression and Award or Resit Board must confirm that submitted referred work is
satisfactory before credit can be awarded and approved. This confirmation will be given as
soon as possible, and students will be notified of the date their results will be available.
Successful completion of second referral work for any assessment component gains a pass
mark of 40% for the unit. Where the referral mark does not improve upon the previous mark,
the previous mark will stand. If the student fails a second, there are no further opportunities
to retrieve the unit. If the student’s overall balance of credit is insufficient to permit
progression, this will normally result in the termination of studies by the Resit or Progression
and Award Board. However, the student may be offered the opportunity to repeat the year.
5.33.​

Work subject to second referral may be subject to the terms of Compensation.

5.34.​ Where a student is required to submit referred work at a point past their expected
end date due to extenuating circumstances, they will have limited access to University
resources and will not be able to use workshops, attend lectures, or access online
materials. Academic staff will not be expected to provide further teaching, but may offer
limited tutorial support.
Repeat
5.35.​ In cases where a student’s overall profile would normally result in the termination of
studies the Progression and Award Board may, at its sole discretion, offer the student the
opportunity to repeat the year and submit work for the failed units. In such cases, the
student will be offered referrals in line with the above rules regarding failure for units for
which ECs have been granted. Otherwise, there is only one final attempt permitted for
failed units and for these, a maximum mark of 40% is only available. A student may only
repeat a year once throughout their course of studies. This opportunity is not available at
Level 6 and 7.
Compensation
5.36.​ Unless otherwise stated in the approved course specification, compensation will
be applied at stage level and agreed during a Progression and Award Board when the
following conditions are met:
15

●​

●​
●​
●​
●​
●​
​
​
​
​

In normal course, no more than 30 credits (or equivalent) (at Levels
4 and 5 (including Extended BA/Foundation Year) can be
compensated in any one stage of an undergraduate course
Progression and Award Board is assured that learning outcomes of the qualification level
have been satisfied, as identified in the course specification.
A minimum mark of no more than 5 percentage points below the unit pass mark
has been achieved in the unit to be compensated
Taking the unit mark to be compensated into account, an aggregate mark of 40%
has been achieved for the qualification level of the undergraduate course
Compensation is not permitted for postgraduate units, nor for specific
undergraduate units as defined in the course specification
In exceptional circumstances where there is significant disruption to the learning
environment and where the learning outcomes for a unit at Level
4 (of no more than 30 credits) have sufficient synergies with other Level 4
learning outcomes, compensation for the unit may be applied to all
affected students without requirement for submission, and in addition to the
form of compensation specified above

5.37.​ A student who receives a compensated pass in a unit shall be awarded the credit
for the unit. The original component mark(s) (i.e. below the pass mark) shall be retained
in the record of marks and used in the calculation of the aggregate mark for the stage or
qualification. In the case of exceptional circumstances where the University is unable to
support the delivery of a specific unit all students compensated will be awarded the pass
mark for the unit and the associated credit.
Trailing credit
5.38.​ The Progression and Award Board may, at its discretion and exceptionally, allow
students to progress to a higher stage of a course without having completed the requisite
120 credit of the lower stage, provided that each of the following conditions are met:
●​
●​
●​

a minimum of 90 credits at the lower level have been successfully completed
including passes in all designated core units
all requirements for academic prerequisites for the higher level units are met
a successful application for extenuating circumstances has been recorded, and
results are still pending in the student’s profile;

Students on Extended BA/Foundation Year are not permitted to trail units into Level 4 of
study.
Grading and Classification of Awards except BA Honours Degrees
5.39.​ Taught MA degrees may be awarded with Merit or Distinction; Merit is awarded
where the overall aggregate mark lies between 60% and 69%, Distinction is awarded where
the overall aggregate mark is 70% or above. The overall aggregate mark is based on the
credit weighted aggregate marks for all units within a course.
16

5.40.​ Performance in work for which an award of credit for prior learning has been made
is not taken into account in the calculation of the final award.
5.41.​ Where the final result of the award classification calculation creates a mark of 0.5%
or greater this will be rounded up to the next full percentage point (e.g. 69.5% is rounded to
70; 59.5% to 60%; and so on).
5.42.​ Where the calculation creates a mark below 0.5% this will be rounded down to the
next full percentage point (e.g. 69.4% is rounded to 69%; 59.4% to 59%; and so on). For the
purposes of rounding up or down, only the first decimal place is used:
BA Honours Degree Classification
5.43.​ Classification of BA degrees will be based on the average of marks across all units
within Level 6 and Level 5 at a ratio of two-thirds for Level 6 and one-third for Level 5 units
respectively.
5.44.​ Honours degrees are classified as:
First class​
​
Upper Second class​ ​
Lower Second class​ ​
Third class​
​

Aggregate mark of 70% or above
Aggregate mark between 60% and 69%
Aggregate mark between 50% and 59%
Aggregate mark between 40% and 49%

5.45.​ Where students have directly entered a Qualification Level 6 ‘top-up’ award the
calculation for the honours classification will be based solely on all credits at Level 6.
5.46.​ Performance in work for which an award of credit for prior learning has been made
is not taken into account in the calculation of the final award.
5.47.​ Where the final result of the award classification calculation creates a mark of 0.5%
or greater this will be rounded up to the next full percentage point (e.g. 69.5% is rounded to
70; 59.5% to 60%; and so on). Where the calculation creates a mark below 0.5% this will be
rounded down to the next full percentage point (e.g. 69.4% is rounded to 69%; 59.4% to
59%; and so on). For the purposes of rounding up or down, only the first decimal place is
used.
Exit awards
5.48.​ A student who has withdrawn from a course or has exhausted all assessment
attempts will automatically be considered for an exit award where sufficient credit has been
accrued. Wherever a student leaves with an exit award they may reapply at a later date to
upgrade to a higher award on the same course, if still offered.
Posthumous and Aegrotat awards
5.49.​ Should a student be prevented by illness, or other circumstances, from completing
17

the final assessed component of the course, the Progression and Award Board, having
considered the relevant evidence (including medical certification) may make a
recommendation that an Aegrotat award be made. Such exceptions are limited to students
who are permanently unable to continue their studies and are registered for the final unit
that would complete a qualification, and have been assessed on at least part of the unit.
The board must be satisfied that the student's prior performance shows beyond reasonable
doubt that they would have passed but for the illness, or other circumstances.
5.50.​ Posthumous awards are permitted for all courses. The classification for such
awards is based on past performance and aligned to the closest exit award (which may
include a classification).

18

SECTION SIX
ACADEMIC MISCONDUCT
6.1.​ Academic misconduct is defined as ‘Any action by a student which gives or has the
potential to give an unfair advantage in an examination or assessment, or might assist
someone else to gain unfair advantage, or any activity likely to undermine the integrity
essential to scholarship or research.’ (Office of the Independent Adjudicator)
6.2.​ In investigating and dealing with cases of suspected misconduct, the Academic
Misconduct Policy is followed.
6.3.​ The following is a non-exhaustive list of examples of academic misconduct which will
be considered under these Regulations:
●​

●​
●​
●​
●​
●​
●​
●​

Plagiarism:
o​
Poor referencing
o​
Paraphrasing without acknowledgement
o​
Copying another student’s work (raw data, notes, or a finished piece)
o​
Self-/auto-plagiarism
Falsifying data, evidence or results
Misrepresentation
Impersonation
Cheating in examinations/assessments (including in-class tests)
Collusion
Inappropriate use of Generative Artificial Intelligence tools
Contract cheating
o​
Paying others to complete work
o​
Essay mills
o​
Pay-per-hour freelance websites/forums
o​
Friends/family/other students

6.4.​ The Skills and Post-16 Education Act 2022 makes it an offence to provide or arrange
to provide all or part of an assignment where this could then not reasonably be considered
to have been completed personally by the student. It is also an offence to advertise this
service.
●​ It is a strict liability offence so the intent of the service provider is irrelevant.
●​ Service providers cannot use disclaimers as a defence
●​ Excludes students using such services from being considered to have commissioned
a criminal offence
6.5.​

19

AUP’s Academic Misconduct Policy is at Appendix C.

SECTION SEVEN
EXTENUATING CIRCUMSTANCES
7.1.​ In the case of University closure through response to disasters and/or national
emergencies and ensuing disruption to teaching and assessment, the University is able to
provide extenuating circumstances and extended deadlines to all affected students without
the requirement for an EC application to be submitted.
7.2.​ The University operates extenuating circumstances procedures to ensure that
students experiencing serious illness and other forms of exceptional and unforeseen
interference with their academic performance are treated fairly during the assessment
process. If a student has failed (or failed to sit/submit) all or part of an assessment due to
valid extenuating circumstances, the student has a right to sit/submit the assessment as if
for the first time in a form and by a date to be determined by the Progression and Award
Board. The procedure is set out in full at Appendix D.
7.3.​ Students are responsible for making known any exceptional circumstances which
have affected their academic performance. Where appropriate, these circumstances may be
taken into account by the Progression and Award Board in making a decision. It is not the
intention that extenuating circumstances procedures serve to mitigate failure or to give any
student an unfair advantage over their peers. Equally, extenuating circumstances will not be
accepted as a reason for any form of academic misconduct.
7.4.​ Where a student is aware that particular circumstances, be they work-related, family
or financial problems, or any other issues, are likely to interfere with their ability successfully
to complete their academic work in any semester or academic session, it is also open to the
student to apply to interrupt studies for a period and return to complete the course of study
when the problems are not so great.
7.5.​ It may also be possible for a student undertaking a full time course to transfer to
part-time study so as better to balance academic and other commitments.
7.6.​ Students are responsible for ensuring that they notify the University of any
extenuating circumstances by submitting an extenuating circumstances claim form. This
should be submitted as soon as possible, and must be submitted within 5 working days after
the deadline date for submissions of work affected by the extenuating circumstances.
Supporting evidence must be provided with the form, or if unavailable at that time, within 1
month of the date of submission of the claim form. If a student fails, without good cause, to
provide information about extenuating circumstances within these timescales the University
will reject the claim.
7.7.​ The University maintains oversight of all claims for extenuating circumstances
through reporting decisions taken to Unit Assessment Boards to Progression and Award
Boards. Consideration of complex cases will be referred to the Extenuating Circumstances
Panel for decision. Unit marks presented at these Boards will clearly identify where
extenuation has been considered and applied.
20

SECTION EIGHT
ASSESSMENT RESPONSIBILITIES AND PROCEDURES
8.1.​ This section of the Regulations set out the assessment responsibilities within AUP
relating to taught courses of study and should be read in conjunction with other information
in these regulations and other salient University guidance, particularly AUP Higher
Education Assessment and Moderation Procedures and the definitive course documents.
The University operates a two-tier arrangement of Unit Assessment Boards (UABs) and
Progression and Award Boards (PABs) for all taught courses:
●​

Unit Assessment Boards determine the final mark for each student in every unit
within their purview and award academic credits for the unit to every student
who has demonstrated appropriate achievement against the learning outcomes
of those units.

●​

Progression and Award Boards make decisions relating to the progression of
students in courses and to the consequence of failure at any stage of a course.
They make recommendations to Academic Board for the conferment and
classification of awards.

8.2.​ The Academic Registrar is responsible for the central administration of UABs and
PABs, assisted by Registry and other University administrative staff.
8.3.​ Through the Dean of Arts, Design & Media, Assistant Deans and Course Leaders,
the Pro Vice-Chancellor (Academic) is responsible for the academic standards of
assignments and related assessment of student performance.
8.4.​ Exceptionally, circumstances beyond the control of the University might make it
impossible to operate the processes of assessment in accordance with these regulations
and procedures. In such circumstances the Vice-Chancellor, as Chair of Academic Board,
will approve proposals from the Deputy Vice-Chancellor that will vary these regulations and
procedures or vary the constitution or quoracy requirements of any board, panel or
committee. The Vice-Chancellor will make the variation(s) known to staff and students by a
written statement published either in hard copy or electronically or both. Before doing so, the
Vice-Chancellor will notify the Chair of the Board of Governors in writing of the variation and
the reasons for it. The Academic Registrar will report the variation and the reasons for it to
the next meeting of Academic Board. Specific powers relating to Unit Assessment Boards
and Progression and Award Boards are set out at Appendix E of these Regulations.
Guidance on the procedures to be followed when using these powers may be obtained from
the Deputy Vice-Chancellor or Academic Registrar.
8.5.​ Appendix E of these Regulations sets out detailed procedures for Unit
Assessment Boards and Progression and Award Boards.

21

SECTION NINE
EXTERNAL EXAMINERS
9.1.​ Each undergraduate and postgraduate course has at least one external examiner,
with the precise number being dependent on student numbers and the breadth of the
course curriculum. The external examiner(s) for the course(s) attends Unit Assessment
Board whilst the Chief External Examiner attends Progression and Award Board. The
regulations governing the formal remit and operation of the AUP External Examiner system
is contained at Appendix F.

22

SECTION TEN
ACADEMIC APPEALS AND COMPLAINTS
Complaints and appeals
10.1.​ The procedure for academic appeals is provided to enable students to appeal the
decisions of Progression and Award Boards and the assessment process which gives rise to
these. An appeal is not the appropriate procedure for students to raise problems
experienced with the delivery of their course, supervisory issues or the availability of
facilities, for example. These issues need to be pursued through AUP Complaints
Procedures for Students. However, when considering an appeal, if it seems that issues
raised would be dealt with more appropriately via the complaints procedure, the student will
be advised to this effect and as to how the University proposes to deal with the issues
raised. In some circumstances it may be appropriate for AUP to consider some of the issues
raised by a student through the appeal process and others as a complaint. This will be
made clear to the student.
10.2.​ The procedures for both complaints and appeals are available to students through
the student portal and student handbooks. The Complaints Procedure is also available on
the University website:
https://www.aup.ac.uk/reports-legal-privacy
Grounds for appeal
10.3.​ The University will only consider an appeal where a student can produce evidence:
●​
●​
●​
●​
●​

that assessments were not conducted in accordance with the current Assessment
Regulations.
that some other material irregularity, related to assessment, has occurred.
the mark(s) and/or result published by the University contains grammatical or
other errors of fact.
that there is evidence of prejudice or of bias such that the validity of the result of
assessment(s) is called into question
in support of a claim that performance in the assessment was adversely affected by
extenuating circumstances which the student was unable or, for valid reasons,
unwilling to divulge before the Progression and Award Board reached its decision

10.4.​ Disagreement with the academic judgement of an Assessment or Award Board
cannot constitute grounds for an appeal. Disappointment with results if marks were
accurately recorded, assessment regulations were followed and there is no evidence of
material irregularity does not constitute grounds for appeal. Nor is the level of marks in itself
evidence of any irregularity. Students with a query regarding a mark awarded should
address this with their Course Leader in the first instance; it may be that the query can be
resolved through further discussion without requiring an appeal.
10.5.​ An appeal must be made within the time limits and in the manner prescribed in the
AUP Appeals Procedure at Appendix G.
23

10.6.​ An Appeals Panel will sit to consider any and all academic appeals, following which
the student will be sent a written statement setting out the decision that has been made and
the reasons for reaching that decision, together with any actions required by the student or
AUP to follow up and implement that decision. The written statement will also include details
of any further right of appeal available to the student if they remain dissatisfied with the final
outcome of University procedures.
10.7 ​ Academic Partners are expected to use their own internal processes to consider both
appeals and complaints, providing reports to the University on any appeals and complaints
made by students, and the appropriate outcome. If a student remains dissatisfied with the
outcome of an appeal or complaint, they will be able to lodge their case with the University
for further action.

24

SECTION 11
TRANSCRIPTS, DIPLOMA SUPPLEMENTS AND CERTIFICATES
11.1 ​ On completion of each unit a student will receive notification of provisional unit
assessment marks from their Course Leader or Unit Tutor via the Student Portal.
Students are responsible for ensuring that they obtain their assessment marks once
available.
11.2.​ Students should note that at this stage these marks will not have been confirmed and
they may subsequently be subject to moderation at the Unit Assessment Board. All marks
following the completion of a unit should therefore be viewed as provisional until the meeting
of the Progression and Award Board.
11.3.​ Upon successful completion of the requirements for an award a student will receive a
Diploma Supplement and an Award Certificate. Students withdrawing prior to meeting the
requirements of a degree award may be eligible for an exit award and will receive a
certificate and transcript of credits achieved.
11.4.​ The Student Transcript will be issued to students who have concluded their studies
at AUP, usually having completed their Award. Its purpose is to serve as a formal record of
achievement and supplement the Award Certificate, giving details of the credit obtained.
11.5.​ Further information is at Appendix H.

25

GLOSSARY
Accreditation of Prior
Learning (APL)

Assessment component
Assessment element
Award
Compensation

Course
Course
specification

Credit

Credit level

Deferral
Exit award

Learning outcome

Office for Students

Office of the Independent
Adjudicator (OIA)

26

Assessment of prior learning that has occurred in any of a
range of contexts including school, University and university,
and/or through life and work experiences. Once recognised
through this process, prior learning can be used to gain credit
or exemption for qualifications.
This includes Accreditation of Prior Certificated Learning
(APCL), Accreditation of Prior ExperientialLearning (APEL).
An individual piece of work or a collection of pieces of work
that forms a summative assessment
An assessment element is a piece of work that contributes to
an assessment component.
AUP qualification given to students following the successful
completion of an approved course of study.
Compensation can be applied to the results of a student who
has failed to attain the required pass mark at undergraduate
level
A schedule of academic study and assessment which leads to
a AUP award
A document that defines key characteristics of an award,
including learning outcomes, models of teaching and learning,
assessment schemes, and how individual units relate to
qualification levels and contribute to the classification of
awards.
A means of quantifying and recognising learning, expressed as
‘numbers of credits’ at a specific credit level.
One credit represents 10 notional hours of learning (including
individual study).
An indicator of the relative complexity, depth and autonomy of
learning associated with a particular unit (used in credit
frameworks).
The delay of submission of work for the first time to a later
submission date due to extenuating circumstances
A lower award than one for which the student is registered, that
may be conferred if a student completes part of, but not all, of
the requirements of the course for which they are registered.
What a student is expected to know, understand and be able to
demonstrate after completing a defined element of study.
Learning outcomes features within the course specification must
align with unit descriptors.
The Office for Students (OfS) is a non-departmental public
body of the Department for Education of the United Kingdom
Government. It acts as the regulator and competition authority
for the higher education sector in England.
The Student Ombudsman Service who will consider appeals
and/or complaints externally to the University after local
procedures have been exhausted and a Completion of
Procedures letter issued.

Progression

The advancement (or progress) by a student from one stage of
a course to an adjacent higher stage. Such progression is the
subject of regulations of AUP and must be confirmed at a
meeting of the Progression and Award Board.

Qualification
level

One of a series of defined points in the Further and Higher
Education Qualification Framework. They are numbered in
ascending order. Qualifications at the same qualification level
share characteristics and require similar achievement.

Quality Assurance
Agency (QAA)

The UK government-appointed agency that safeguards the
quality and standard of the higher education awards offered by
UK universities. Arts University Plymouth complies with the
codes of practice defined by the QAA and is subject to its
scrutiny
To take again part or all failed assessments component in
order to pass a unit. Referral does not require the student to
participate in classes.
To repeat study, submitting new work against failed units
again.
A stage of an undergraduate course is a collection of study
consisting of a total of 120 credits. In full-time courses of
study a stage is equivalent to the year of study. Stages are
usually commensurate with a credit level.
A self-contained, formally structured, credit-bearing unit of
study with explicit learning outcomes. (Some institutions use
the word ‘course’ to refer to individual units.)
A document that defines key characteristics of a unit, and
includes learning outcomes, models of teaching and
learning,and assessment schemes.
The formal process whereby a new course of study is critically
appraised in order to establish that it meets the requirements for
approval. Approval of a course of study is for a period of up to
five years before a further validation (re-validation) is required.

Referral

Repeat
Stage

Unit

Unit Specification
Forms
Validation

27

APPENDIX A
LEVEL DESCRIPTORS
Level 4
The qualification descriptor provided for Level 4 on the FHEQ is for any Certificate of Higher
Education. Certificates of Higher Education are awarded to students who have
demonstrated:
●​

●​

knowledge of the underlying concepts and principles associated with their area(s) of
study, and an ability to evaluate and interpret these within the context of that area of
study
an ability to present, evaluate and interpret qualitative and quantitative data, in
order to develop lines of argument and make sound judgements in accordance with
basic theories and concepts of their subject(s) of study.

Typically, holders of the qualification will be able to:
●​
●​
●​

evaluate the appropriateness of different approaches to solving problems related to
their area(s) of study and/or work
communicate the results of their study/work accurately and reliably, and with
structured and coherent arguments
undertake further training and develop new skills within a structured and managed
environment.

And holders will have:
●​ the qualities and transferable skills necessary for employment requiring the exercise of some
personal responsibility
Holders of a Certificate of Higher Education will have a sound knowledge of the basic
concepts of a subject, and will have learned how to take different approaches to solving
problems. They will be able to communicate accurately and will have the qualities needed for
employment requiring the exercise of some personal responsibility. The Certificate of Higher
Education may be a first step towards obtaining higher-level qualifications.
Level 5
The descriptor provided for this level of the FHEQ is for any foundation degree which should meet
the descriptor in full. This qualification descriptor should also be used as a reference point for other
qualifications at Level 5 of the FHEQ, such as Diplomas of Higher Education and Higher National
Diplomas.
●​
●​
28

knowledge and critical understanding of the well-established principles of their
area(s) of study, and of the way in which those principles have developed
ability to apply underlying concepts and principles outside the context in which they
were first studied, including, where appropriate, the application of those principles in

●​

●​

an employment context
knowledge of the main methods of enquiry in the subject(s) relevant to the named
award, and ability to evaluate critically the appropriateness of different approaches
to solving problems in the field of study
an understanding of the limits of their knowledge, and how this influences analyses
and interpretations based on that knowledge.

Typically, holders of the qualification will be able to:
●​
●​

●​

use a range of established techniques to initiate and undertake critical analysis of
information, and to propose solutions to problems arising from that analysis
effectively communicate information, arguments and analysis in a variety of forms to
specialist and non-specialist audiences and deploy key techniques of the discipline
effectively
undertake further training, develop existing skills and acquire new competences
that will enable them to assume significant responsibility within organisations.

And holders will have:
●​

the qualities and transferable skills necessary for employment requiring the
exercise of personal responsibility and decision-making.

Holders of qualifications at this level will have developed a sound understanding of the
principles in their field of study, and will have learned to apply those principles more
widely. Through this, they will have learned to evaluate the appropriateness of different
approaches to solving problems. Their studies may well have had a vocational
orientation - for example, HNDs - enabling them to perform effectively in their chosen
field. Holders of qualifications at this level will have the qualities necessary for
employment in situations requiring the exercise of personal responsibility and
decision-making.
Level 6
The descriptor provided for this level of the FHEQ is for any bachelor's degree with honours
which should meet the descriptor in full. This qualification descriptor should also be used as
a reference point for other qualifications at Level 6 of the FHEQ, including bachelor's
degrees and graduate diplomas. Bachelor's degrees with honours are awarded to students
who have demonstrated:
●​

●​
●​

29

a systematic understanding of key aspects of their field of study, including
acquisition of coherent and detailed knowledge, at least some of which is at, or
informed by, the forefront of defined aspects of a discipline
an ability to deploy accurately established techniques of analysis and enquiry within
a discipline
conceptual understanding that enables the student:
o​
to devise and sustain arguments, and/or to solve problems, using

●​
●​

ideas and techniques, some of which are at the forefront of a discipline
o​
to describe and comment upon particular aspects of current
research, or equivalent advanced scholarship, in the discipline
an appreciation of the uncertainty, ambiguity and limits of knowledge
the ability to manage their own learning, and to make use of scholarly reviews and
primary sources (for example, refereed research articles and/or original materials
appropriate to the discipline).

Typically, holders of the qualification will be able to:
●​

●​

●​

apply the methods and techniques that they have learned to review, consolidate,
extend and apply their knowledge and understanding, and to initiate and carry out
projects
critically evaluate arguments, assumptions, abstract concepts and data (that may
be incomplete), to make judgements, and to frame appropriate questions to achieve
a solution - or identify a range of solutions - to a problem
communicate information, ideas, problems and solutions to both specialist and nonspecialist audiences.

Typically, therefore, holders will have the qualities and transferable skills necessary for
employment requiring:
●​
●​
●​

the exercise of initiative and personal responsibility
decision-making in complex and unpredictable contexts
the learning ability needed to undertake appropriate further training of a
professional or equivalent nature.

And holders will have:
●​ the qualities and transferable skills necessary for employment requiring:
●​ the exercise of initiative and personal responsibility
●​ decision-making in complex and unpredictable contexts
●​ the learning ability needed to undertake appropriate further training of a
professional or equivalent nature.
Holders of a bachelor's degree with honours will have developed an understanding of a
complex body of knowledge, some of it at the current boundaries of an 22 academic
discipline. Through this, the holder will have developed analytical techniques and
problem-solving skills that can be applied in many types of employment. The holder of such
a qualification will be able to evaluate evidence, arguments and assumptions, to reach
sound judgements and to communicate them effectively.
Holders of a bachelor's degree with honours should have the qualities needed for
employment in situations requiring the exercise of personal responsibility, and
decision-making in complex and unpredictable circumstances.
Bachelor's degrees with honours form the largest group of higher education qualifications.
30

Typically, learning outcomes for these courses would be expected to be achieved on the
basis of study equivalent to three or four full-time academic years and lead to qualifications
with titles such as Bachelor of Arts, BA (Hons) or Bachelor of Science, BSc (Hons). In
addition to bachelor's degrees at this level are short courses and professional 'conversion'
courses, based largely on undergraduate material, and taken usually by those who are
already graduates in another discipline, leading to, for example, graduate certificates or
graduate diplomas.
Level 7
The descriptor provided for this level of the Frameworks is for any taught master's
degree which should meet the descriptor in full. This qualification descriptor should also
be used as a reference point for other qualifications at Level 7 on the FHEQ/SCQF Level
11 on the FQHEIS, including postgraduate certificates and postgraduate diplomas.
Master's degrees are awarded to students who have demonstrated:
●​ a systematic understanding of knowledge, and a critical awareness of current problems
and/or new insights, much of which is at, or informed by, the forefront of their academic
discipline, field of study or area of professional practice
●​ a comprehensive understanding of techniques applicable to their own research or advanced
scholarship
●​ originality in the application of knowledge, together with a practical understanding of how
established techniques of research and enquiry are used to create and interpret knowledge in
the discipline
●​ conceptual understanding that enables the student:
○​ to evaluate critically current research and advanced scholarship in the discipline;
○​ to evaluate methodologies and develop critiques of them and, where appropriate, to
propose new hypotheses.
Typically, holders of the qualification will be able to:
●​ deal with complex issues - both systematically and creatively, make sound judgements in the
absence of complete data, and communicate their conclusions clearly to specialist and
non-specialist audiences
●​ demonstrate self-direction and originality in tackling and solving problems, and act
autonomously in planning and implementing tasks at a professional or equivalent level
●​ continue to advance their knowledge and understanding, and to develop new skills to a high
level.
And holders will have:
●​ the qualities and transferable skills necessary for employment requiring:
○​ the exercise of initiative and personal responsibility
○​ decision-making in complex and unpredictable situations
○​ the independent learning ability required for continuing professional development.
Much of the study undertaken for master's degrees is at, or informed by, the forefront of an academic
or professional discipline. Successful students show originality in the application of knowledge, and
they understand how the boundaries of knowledge are advanced through research. They are able to
deal with complex issues - both systematically and creatively, and they show originality in tackling
31

and solving problems. They have the qualities needed for employment in circumstances requiring
sound judgement, personal responsibility and initiative in complex and unpredictable professional
environments.
Master's degrees are awarded after completion of taught courses, courses of research or a mixture
of both. The learning outcomes of most master's degree courses are achieved on the basis of study
equivalent to at least one full-time calendar year and are taken by graduates with a bachelor's degree
with honours (or equivalent achievement).
Master's degrees are often distinguished from other qualifications at this framework level (for
example, advanced short courses, which often form parts of continuing professional development
courses and lead to postgraduate certificates and/or postgraduate diplomas) by an increased
intensity, complexity and density of study. Master's degrees, in comparison to postgraduate
certificates and postgraduate diplomas, typically include planned intellectual progression that often
includes a synoptic/research or scholarly activity.

32

APPENDIX B
ACCREDITATION OF PRIOR LEARNING
General
The Accreditation of Prior Learning (APL) process allows students to claim for learning
which they have gained before starting their course to be counted towards their final
award.
Students can make two types of claim. One is for Accreditation of Prior Certificated Learning
(APCL) and the other is for Accreditation of Prior Experiential Learning (APEL).
Accreditation of Prior Certificated Learning (APCL) is previous learning undertaken at the
University or another institution for which qualifications or certificates have been awarded,
for example a university unit, higher national unit or higher national certificate or diploma.
Accreditation of Prior Experiential Learning (APEL) is learning based on experience. It is
about knowledge and skills gained from life and work experiences. It is important to stress
that credit is not given for the experience itself. It is what the student has learned from the
experience that counts.
When making an APL claim the students’ prior learning has to relate to the course they
want to study at the University and it has to be at the relevant HE level. The claim can be
based on prior certificated learning, prior experiential learning or a combination of the two.
Academic Regulations (Section 3) confirm the maximum amount of credit that can be
claimed under APL.
Direct Entry
The Academic Regulations allow for entry into each year of a degree course. The
University does not award APL for Level 6 units.
It is expected that applicants would discuss eligibility for direct entry at the time of application
and should apply for their desired year of entry when applying via UCAS.
The student is responsible for submitting evidence to support their claim for direct entry.
Evidence is likely to be an academic transcript / certificate that demonstrates previous
achievement. This evidence should be provided at the point of interview where possible and
the Course Leader will assess the evidence provided for validity, sufficiency and
authenticity, and advise the Admissions team that the evidence provided is appropriate. The
evidence will be shared with the Academic Registrar for recording of assessment
information.
In such cases the student is not required to complete the application process for APL.
Students who enter directly into Level 6 of a degree course will have their award calculated
33

solely on the achievement at this level, (refer to Section 3, Academic Regulations for further
detail).
Claims Procedure
There are five distinct stages to deal with a claim for APL. To ensure a consistent approach
and to allow tracking of progress please ensure that all claims are progressed through the
five stages. It is expected that the majority of APL claims should be fully processed by the
end of the Autumn term.
Stage 1 – Initial Enquiry
Initial enquiries are most likely to arise during the application and interview process, but may
also occur during induction and tutorial activity. Students who wish to proceed with a claim
must request an interview with the Course Leader to discuss the process in more detail.
(Claim Form).
Stage 2 – Meeting to discuss claim
At this meeting the student will be expected to bring with them evidence to support their
claim for APL and the Course Leader will need to have a discussion with them to consider
how appropriate their claim is in terms of meeting course requirements, bearing in mind the
maximum claim amounts detailed in the University regulations. If appropriate, the student
should be given advice on how to proceed with the claim and what further evidence will be
required, this is particularly important for APEL claims where students must demonstrate
the learning they have gained from life and work experiences.
Stage 3 – Making a formal claim
Should the student wish to proceed with their claim they must complete the APL claim form
(provided by Registry) and submit to the relevant Course Leader. A further
interview/tutorial will then be arranged to discuss and review the evidence provided by the
student, and where necessary further meetings will be arranged should the student be
requested to provide further evidence.
Stage 4 – Assessing the claim
Assessing APL claims is the responsibility of Academic staff and must follow the same
principles applied to all assessment activity for HE provision.
Claim for APCL:
Staff assessing APCL claims must check that the student has supplied evidence of prior
certificated learning to support their claim. It is normally expected that where APCL is
awarded for units completed at other institutions that the grades awarded will be matched to
units as appropriate. Where this is not possible a pass grade of 40% for undergraduate and
50% for postgraduate will be awarded. The Course Leader must complete Section D of the
APL claim form ready for stage 5 of the process.
34

Claim for APEL:
Staff assessing APEL claims must check that the student has supplied evidence of learning
gained from life and work experiences – the student should have already been advised the
form of evidence required. Evidence provided for a claim should cover the following:
●​ Validity – it must be appropriate in terms of level and relevance for the purpose of the
claim
●​ Sufficiency – it must be enough to satisfy the learning outcomes of the unit(s)
being claimed
●​ Currency – it must demonstrate the claimant’s current knowledge and abilities –
in most cases this should be no longer than 5 years before the planned start date
●​ Authenticity – it must be indicative of the claimant’s own learning.
Prior learning should relate directly to the learning outcomes of those units for which
credit is being sought.
The Course Leader will work with a nominated assessor, not previously involved in the
claim, to review the evidence provided by the student and will, as required:
●​ Assess the evidence provided identifying any areas where further information is
required
●​ Confirm that evidence provided demonstrates that prior learning meets the learning
outcomes of the unit(s)
●​ Award a grade for each unit claimed (SEE NOTE BELOW)
The Course Leader and Assessor must complete Section E of the claim form ready for
stage 5 of the process.
NOTE: In most circumstances APEL claims will receive a pass grade i.e. 40% for
undergraduate students and 50% for postgraduate, however in exceptional circumstances
where substantial evidence is available of outstanding prior experiences the assessment
team may be able to arrive at and apply a higher grade.
Stage 5 – Processing the Claim
The Course Leader will:
●​ Present the completed claim form to the relevant Assistant Dean for approval
●​ Pass all information to the Academic Registrar for recording and communication to
the student.
●​ Ensures all claims are available for review by External Examiners
Note: All claims for APL and associated grades are subject to final confirmation by the
Unit Assessment Board and Progression and Award Board

35

APPENDIX C
ACADEMIC MISCONDUCT POLICY
Introduction
Academic integrity is fundamental to the reputation of academic institutions. Arts University
Plymouth is committed both to developing high standards of academic practice among its
students and to safeguarding the standards of its academic awards by detecting and acting
upon cases of academic misconduct.
This policy is designed to be read in conjunction with the wider Academic Regulations that it
is a part of and also suggests guidelines about good and bad academic practice.
The policy applies to all undergraduate and postgraduate courses leading to awards of the
University; including those delivered at Partner Institutions, who will identify staff to manage
this process.
Definition of Academic Misconduct
Academic misconduct is defined as ‘Any action by a student which gives or has the
potential to give an unfair advantage in an examination or assessment, or might assist
someone else to gain unfair advantage, or any activity likely to undermine the integrity
essential to scholarship or research.’ (Office of the Independent Adjudicator, 2022)
In investigating and dealing with cases of suspected misconduct, the Academic Misconduct
Policy is followed and any penalties arising are levied in line with the AMBeR Tariff.
Examples of Academic Misconduct
The following is a non-exhaustive list of examples of academic misconduct which will be
considered under these Regulations:
●​

Plagiarism:
o​
Poor referencing (for example failing to follow convention in
acknowledging sources, use of quotation marks etc.)
o​
Paraphrasing without acknowledgement
o​
Copying another student’s work (raw data, notes, or commissioning,
purchase and submission of a piece of work, in part or whole, as their own)
o​
Self-/auto-plagiarism (submitting the same work that the student has
already submitted for another assessment when this is not permitted

It is recognised that some plagiarism may not be deliberate but instead poor academic skills
(see case study examples below).
If a student has an acknowledged learning disability, a proof-reader may be used to ensure
that the student’s meaning is not misunderstood as a result of the quality and standard of
36

writing. The proof-reader may identify spelling and basic grammatical errors, but
inaccuracies in academic content should not be corrected and nor should the structure of the
piece of work be changed.
●​

Falsifying data, evidence or results
o​
made up survey results for example

●​

Misrepresentation
o​
Submitting fraudulent extenuating circumstances claims or falsifying
evidence in support of extenuating circumstances claims (this may also be
considered a non-academic disciplinary matter)

●​

Impersonation
o​
sitting someone else’s examination for example

●​

Cheating in examinations/assessments (including in-class tests)

●​

Collusion
o​
working with someone else on an assessment which is intended to be
the student’s own work;
o​
cooperation in order to gain an unpermitted advantage.
o​
legitimate input from tutors or approved readers or scribes is not
considered to be collusion.

●​

Inappropriate use of Generative Artificial Intelligence tools
o​
submitting work for assessment that consists only of substantially
unmodified content from Generative Artificial Intelligence software will be
considered as poor academic practice
o​
persistent exhibition of poor academic practice through inappropriate use
of Generative Artificial Intelligence tools, such as a lack of evidencing their
use.

●​

Misconduct in examinations (including in-class tests)

●​

Breaches of research and ethics policies
o​
carrying out research without appropriate permission

●​

Contract cheating
o​
Paying others to complete work
o​
Essay mills
o​
Pay-per-hour freelance websites/forums
o​
Friends/family/other students

The Skills and Post-16 Education Act 2022 makes it an offence to provide or arrange to
provide all or part of an assignment where this could then not reasonably be considered to
have been completed personally by the student. It is also an offence to advertise this
service.
37

●​ It is a strict liability offence so the intent of the service provider is irrelevant.
●​ Service providers cannot use disclaimers as a defence
●​ Excludes students using such services from being considered to have commissioned
a criminal offence
Example / Case Study
Plagiarism or poor academic practice?
A student submits an essay during their first semester. The student’s tutor notices that the essay
contains a small section of text that is quoted directly from the coursework materials. The quoted
text is not separated from the other text by quotation marks, italics or indented text.
The tutor tells the student about her concerns and invites them to a meeting to discuss the essay.
She says that she is considering whether to refer the student to the Academic Misconduct
Procedures.
After a discussion, the tutor decides that the student did not understand how to reference
quotations. She decides to take this into account as poor academic practice when marking the
work. She explains the referencing requirements and shows the student some training resources
on the intranet. She tells them that she will not take any further action, but that she is making a
record of their discussions so that if their work is suspected of plagiarism in the future, the incident
may be taken into account.
Previous poor academic practice
A third-year student is accused of plagiarism in their dissertation: some text has been copied from
a textbook without a reference. The student was penalised for poor academic practice in their
second year and at that time the student had to attend a refresher session on referencing. The
copied text in the dissertation is not extensive and the provider considers whether the student is
guilty of poor academic practice.
The provider decides that the student is guilty of plagiarism even though the copying is not
extensive because of the previous incident of poor academic practice which was very similar.
Responsibilities
Students shall be considered responsible for the academic integrity of all work they submit
for assessment, including group assessments.
All students must ensure that they are aware of, and comply with, University and course
requirements and that they are not party to any behaviour which could be construed as
academic misconduct.
Students authorised to work in pairs and/or groups will normally be required to complete a
cover sheet declaring whether the work was undertaken alone or as part of a team. Students
may be required to name other students with whom they worked and/or identify individual
responsibility for component parts.
38

Students submitting an individual assignment must confirm that the work is entirely their own
and has been completed in accordance with University and Course Regulations.
The University requires the submission of written work for specified units (in 2024/25 these
are Level 4 404, Level 5 502 and Level 6 602, along with all Postgraduate written work)
through Turnitin to ensure appropriate academic conventions are utilised, and so that any
concerns around Academic Misconduct can be identified.
Course Leaders must ensure that students receive written guidelines clearly identifying the
parameters of acceptable practice for the units for which they are responsible. Where
students are authorised/required to work collaboratively, the unit leader must specify the
boundaries of collaboration at the outset. Information on the presentation of written
assignments in order to avoid allegations of academic misconduct (e.g. information on
acceptable referencing etc) should be reinforced in lectures, seminars and tutorials as
appropriate.
The pedagogic aims of this policy and its use of marks caps (in the tables below) reflects the
academic merit of any work produced by such misconduct. Therefore, expressions of guilt,
remorse or lack of intent will not usually be accepted as justifications for any alleged
misconduct or in determining how a student should be dealt with where such misconduct is
established.
Academic judgement
Identifying suspected academic misconduct and making decisions on disciplinary cases will
often, but not always, involve academic judgement. Where an academic judgement is made
it should be evidence based. For example, an academic member of staff who says that the
standard of an assignment is out of line with the student’s other work should be able to
support that with examples from the student’s other work.
The interpretation of academic misconduct detection software reports will involve academic
judgement. It is good practice to share the academic analysis of such a report with the
student as well as the report itself.
Deciding questions of fact does not involve academic judgement. Decisions on the penalty
to apply in academic disciplinary cases will not normally involve academic judgement.
Alleged Coursework Misconduct (including tests)
​
-​

Panel of Investigation

The University will convene formal meetings of Panels of Investigation for coursework
misconduct (including tests) as and when required. The Panel will be convened by the
Academic Registrar who will act as Secretary to the Panel. The Panel will be chaired by the
Pro Vice-Chancellor (Academic) or the Deputy Vice-Chancellor. Panel members will include
an Assistant Dean and a Course Leader. The Academic Registrar will ensure an appropriate
39

gender balance in determining membership.
-​

Initial action by internal or external marker

Where an internal marker suspects that a candidate has breached the Regulations in respect
of assessed work other than a formal examination, they should advise the unit leader for the
work in question.
The unit leader, in consultation with the Academic Registrar, Course Leader, and/or Assistant
Dean, will agree on the appropriate action to be taken. In the first instance, a meeting should
be held with the student, unit leader or Course Leader and Academic Registrar to explore
the concerns raised. On the basis of this meeting the Academic Registrar will confirm the
next steps to be taken and whether the matter should be progressed further as set out
below.
​

Progression to Panel of Investigation
The Academic Registrar must advise the student in writing (recorded delivery letter to local
and home addresses, with copy to the student’s email address) of the allegation and the
date of the University Panel of Investigation, enclosing a copy of these Regulations, and ask
the student to confirm in writing, through standard pro-forma, within 5 working days, whether:
●​

they wish to accept the allegation to be laid against them and understand that the
case will be considered by a Panel. The candidate may submit evidence in
mitigation, in the form of a written statement, for consideration by the Panel if they
so wish. Should a response not be received from the student by the deadline, it will
be assumed that they have accepted the allegation made and the case will be
forwarded to the Panel.

●​

they wish to contest the allegation and appear before a formal hearing of a Panel of
Investigation. The date of the meeting of the Panel will be confirmed in the letter.
The student has the right for their case to be heard in absentia if they are unable to
attend but nonetheless wish to submit a written statement, but will not have the right
to demand a revised date for the Panel to meet. The student will be required to
indicate whether they wish to bring a friend (who may be a fellow student, staff
member, SU officer or other party) and the identity of any such individual. They will
also be required to indicate whether they will be calling any witnesses and if so the
identity of those individuals. It is the student’s responsibility to arrange for the
attendance of their own witnesses.

The Unit Leader must provide a written statement of the grounds for the allegation, the
student’s work, and any other evidence in support of the allegation.
The Academic Registrar will:
●​
●​
40

confirm the membership of the Panel of Investigation
confirm the identity of any witnesses

●​
●​
●​

ensure that all relevant evidence is collected and made available to the Panel
call any witnesses who may be relevant to substantiate the allegation (normally
including the individual who identified the alleged offence and/or the unit leader)
obtain information about any previous proven examination or academic misconduct

Consideration of Alleged Misconduct (including tests)
The Panel is required to examine all the evidence relevant to the circumstances of the
alleged misconduct and to interview the student and any witnesses in order to establish the
facts of the case. Should the student be unable to attend they have the right for their case
to be heard in absentia and to submit a written statement.
The Panel may decide that the student be subject to a viva voce examination as a means of
determining whether an offence has occurred. The viva voce examination will be conducted
by the Pro Vice-Chancellor (Academic) or a nominee, together with one member of the
Panel who will be considering the case. Note: viva voce simply means the questions are
said aloud (orally rather than in writing).
If the Panel decides that there is no case to answer, the Course Leader must ensure that all
records relating to the allegation are removed from the student file.
The outcome of the Panel hearing will be reported to the student in writing within five
working days of the meeting. Penalties for proven cases are detailed below.
Recommendation of penalty to Progression and Award Board
If misconduct has been committed, the Panel will recommend an appropriate penalty to the
Progression and Award Board through the Unit Assessment Board. The recommendation
will take account of the seriousness of the misconduct, any previous misconduct of which
the student has been found proved, the level of study, together with custom and practice
across the University. The recommendation may be:
i)​
ii)​
iii)​
iv)​

​

​

41

that no further action be taken but the misconduct is recorded on the student’s file
that a mark of zero be recorded for the work in question, and the student is required to submit
again with an uncapped grade
that a mark of zero be recorded for the work in question, and the student is required to submit
again with a capped grade
that a mark of zero be recorded for the unit of which the work forms a part and the student be
barred from taking that unit again, this will lead to withdrawal of enrolment, and an exit award
where appropriate.

Progression and Award Board
The Academic Registrar must ensure that all recommendations from Panels of Investigation
are notified to relevant Progression and Award Board through the relevant Unit Assessment
Board.
A student found guilty of academic misconduct for whom the penalty will make them
ineligible for the award on which they are registered (or to result in their
exclusion from the University under the Student Disciplinary Procedure) is nonetheless
eligible for any intermediate award for which they have legitimately met the academic
requirements, and any such award must therefore be conferred.
Allegations made at or after the Progression and Award Board
Exceptionally, misconduct may come to light at or after the meeting of a Unit Assessment
Board or Progression and Award Board. Allegations made at a Board must be investigated
as soon as practicable thereafter. In the meantime, the decision on the student must be
deferred.
When misconduct is discovered after an Award Board has met and results have been
published, the allegation must be referred directly to the Course Leader, who will consult with
the appropriate Assistant Dean, Academic Registrar, unit leader and Chair of the
Progression and Award Board. They will take account:
●​
●​
●​
●​

the nature of the evidence presented
the seriousness of the misconduct
the time which has elapsed
the reasons why it was not discovered earlier.

The University has the power to rescind an award if it considers that there is due cause.
Appeals
The final decision on the penalty for an assessment/examination offence will rest with the
Progression and Award Board and a student has the right to appeal by the deadline date
indicated in the Appeal Regulations.
A student may only appeal on the grounds that:
●​
●​
●​
●​
●​

the procedures were not followed properly;
the decision maker(s) reached an unreasonable decision;
the student has new material evidence that they were unable, for valid reasons, to provide
earlier in the process;
there is bias or reasonable perception of bias during the procedure;
the penalty imposed was disproportionate, or not permitted under the procedures.

If the appeal is not upheld, or is not permitted to proceed under the grounds of appeal, a
Completion of Procedures Letter should be sent to the student within 28 days. This should
42

include, or be accompanied by, an explanation of the decision reached and the reasons for
it, in straightforward language. This will help the student decide whether to pursue the matter
further.
The decision should also advise the student about:
●​ Their right to submit a complaint to the OIA for review;
●​ The time limit for doing so;
●​ Where and how to access advice and support.
The time limit for bringing a complaint to the OIA is 12 months.
Where an appeal is upheld, the provider should provide the student with a written outcome
that explains what action the provider will take.
If the outcome involves referring the case back to the formal stage for reconsideration, it is
good practice to ensure that reconsideration is concluded as soon as possible and, where
practicable, within the 90 calendar days timeframe.
Report to Academic Board
At the first Academic Board meeting of the new academic session, the Academic Registrar
must report on the number of cases considered by the Panel of Investigation, detailing the
number where the allegation was found to be true, the nature of the allegation in each such
case and the penalty invoked. The report shall not name individual students.

43

APPENDIX D
EXTENUATING CIRCUMSTANCES PROCEDURE
Preamble
This procedure applies to students on all taught courses of higher education study;
Academic Partners will operate their own procedure.
Students are responsible for managing their learning and the development of work for
assessment throughout the duration of their studies. The University recognises that illness
and difficult or distressing life events may occur, but considers it a normal part of everyday
life to have to manage these events and continue with work or study. For this reason, such
difficulties are not normally accepted as reasons for a student’s poor performance in
assessment.
The University operates extenuating circumstances procedures to ensure that students
experiencing serious illness and other forms of exceptional and unforeseen interference with
their academic performance are treated fairly during the assessment process. Students are
responsible for making known any exceptional circumstances which have affected their
academic performance. Where appropriate, these circumstances may be taken into account
by the Progression and Award Board in making a decision. It is not the intention that
extenuating circumstances procedures serve to mitigate failure or to give any student an
unfair advantage over their peers. Equally, extenuating circumstances will not be accepted
as a reason for any form of academic misconduct.
Coursework submitted after the deadline date and time will be graded according to
Academic Regulations. Extensions to deadlines for submission of coursework may not be
granted by members of academic staff. A student who misses a deadline or believes that
they will miss a deadline due to extenuating circumstances should submit a claim for
extenuating circumstances in accordance with this procedure.
Coursework which is submitted after the deadline will be assessed but the results will not be
entered onto the official record until any claim for extenuating circumstances has been
considered. Feedback may be given on the quality of the work submitted and an indicative
grade awarded. If the circumstances are deemed valid, the actual result achieved will be
entered onto the record and submitted to the Progression and Award Board. If the
circumstances are not considered valid, no mark will be recorded at the Progression and
Award Board.
Definition of Extenuating Circumstances
Extenuating circumstances are circumstances which
●​
●​
●​
44

are exceptional;
are outside the student’s control;
can be corroborated by independent evidence;

●​
●​

occurred during or shortly before the assessment in question; and
may have led to an unrepresentative performance in relation to the student’s previously
demonstrated ability

It is difficult to lay down hard and fast rules about extenuating circumstances. For instance,
the University would not normally accept claims relating to travel delays which a student
might be expected to have planned for, but if the delay were exceptional, a claim would be
considered. Similarly, a cough, cold or throat infection during a term would not normally be a
valid extenuating circumstance, since students would be expected to plan their work taking
into account the likelihood of minor disruptions.
The University will not accept claims relating to computer failure, corruption of data by virus
or software application, inability to print work or network failure, since students are expected
to keep back-up copies and to plan their work so that they have time to manage
computer/printer failure.
Full-time students may not claim pressure of work as an extenuating circumstance, since the
commitment to full-time study implies a commitment to make available the time necessary.
Part- time students in full-time employment may claim pressure of work, corroborated by
independent documentary evidence that the pressures are exceptional, unpredictable and
outside the student’s control.
For guidance, the following provides examples of claims that may normally not be
considered valid, and normally considered valid. The key issues in all cases will be whether
the claim meets the requirements that the circumstances are exceptional, outside the
student’s control and corroborated by independent evidence.
Examples of circumstances which would not normally be considered valid:
●​ Car broke down, train/bus delayed or cancelled, other public transport problems (unless the
student can demonstrate that they had allowed adequate time to compensate for such
problems as might reasonably have been anticipated)
●​ Child care problems which could have been anticipated
●​ Accidents or illness affecting relatives or friends (unless serious, or the student is a sole
carer)
●​ Unspecified anxiety, mild depression or examination stress
●​ Minor ailments such as cough, cold, sore throat, minor viral infection
●​ Financial problems (other than cases of exceptional unforeseen hardship
●​ Holidays, house moves, family celebrations or other events where the student either has
control over the date or may choose not to participate
●​ Computer problems, corrupt data, disk or printer failure or similar
●​ Problems with postal delivery of work (unless recorded delivery or registered mail)
●​ Pregnancy (unless specific complications)
●​ Time management problems (e.g. competing deadlines)
●​ Appointments (legal, medical etc) which could be rearranged
●​ Sporting or recreational commitments (unless exceptional circumstances such as the student
is competing in national or international competition)
45

Examples of circumstances which might be considered valid:
●​ Bereavement causing significant impact on the student’s attendance or submission of work for
assessment, provided the facts and effects are independently corroborated
●​ Victim of a serious crime (e.g. physical or sexual assault, theft of work required for
assessment) with corroboration from the Police or other recognised authority;
●​ Family breakdown (e.g. separation or divorce either of the student or of the parents or
guardians), provided the facts and effects are independently corroborated
●​ Unexpected caring responsibilities caused by the sudden or worsening illness of a child,
partner or close relative and which can be confirmed in writing
●​ For part-time taught postgraduate students in full-time employment, exceptional pressure of
work or change of employment circumstances, provided the facts and effects are
independently corroborated
●​ Official commitments which cannot be postponed or where the student has no
control over the date, such as jury service or a court appearance as a witness,
defendant or plaintiff, and which can be corroborated by official correspondence
from the Court or Tribunal Authority
●​ Serious personal injury or a physical/mental health condition preventing
attendance or submission of work for assessment and which can be confirmed by
a medical certificate. This does not include a condition which is long-term and is
being managed by the student
●​ Serious personal or psychological problems for which the student is undergoing
counselling or treatment from a registered practitioner and which can be
confirmed in writing.
Submission of information on extenuating circumstances
Students who wish for extenuating circumstances to be considered should complete the
Extenuating Circumstances Form on the Student Portal. The form should be completed by
the student, and corroborating evidence attached. Where evidence is not available at the
time of the claim, this will be followed up by Registry to be provided within one month of the
claim.
Once the form has been submitted, the Registry will log the claim and initiate the appropriate
action regarding consideration for approval as detailed further below.
Extenuating circumstances claims should be submitted as soon as feasible. In the case of
assessed coursework/major project/dissertation or equivalent, extenuating circumstances
claims should be submitted as soon as possible. If a student has submitted a claim of
extenuating circumstances in advance of a submission deadline, has not received formal
confirmation of the outcome of their claim and is in any doubt as to whether the
circumstances will be deemed valid, they should consult the Course Leader.
Corroborating evidence
All claims of extenuating circumstances must be accompanied by independent corroborating
46

evidence. That evidence must be specific about the nature, timing and severity of the
problem and if possible provide an independent assessment of the effect the problem may
have had on the student’s performance.
Corroborating evidence may include:
●​ A medical note confirming a medical or psychological condition (provided at the time when
the student was suffering from that condition)
●​ A letter from a counsellor (either a member of the University Counselling Service or a
qualified counsellor working outside the University) confirming a personal, psychological or
emotional problem for which the student has been receiving counselling
●​ A note from relevant staff in Student Support confirming a particularly severe accommodation
problem
●​ An official document such as a police report including a police reference number, court
summons or other legal document
●​ A letter from a solicitor, social worker or other official agency
●​ An insurance claim document supported by a letter from the insurance company.
●​ Corroboration from support staff in Student Support, with whom the student has previously
been in contact about ongoing difficulties, or from an examination invigilator about illness
during an examination
Academic staff who have been closely involved in the pastoral care of a student may submit written
evidence which corroborates the student’s account, but in order to avoid allegations of unfair
treatment and to ensure consistency of practice, such evidence must be countersigned by the
member of staff designated as responsible for the co-ordination of pastoral care within the University.
It is the responsibility of the staff member concerned to obtain a valid countersignature.
Full-time students may not make an extenuating circumstances claim relating to pressures
of work, since such students have by implication made a commitment to make available the
time necessary for study. Part-time students in full-time employment, who wish to make
claims based on exceptional pressures in their employment, must submit corroborating
documentary evidence (e.g. a letter from their employer) which confirms the particular
circumstances, explains why they are exceptional and outside the student’s control and
formally supports the student’s claim. Where a student is self-employed, she or he must
provide independent evidence to support the claim that the pressures are exceptional and
outside the student’s control.
Students should not seek to obtain corroborating evidence retrospectively. Any certificate or
other medical note where the date of the certificate is after the date(s) of the illness may not
be accepted.
Students will have one month from the date of submission of the claim to provide
corroborating evidence, otherwise the claim will be deemed invalid (except where prevented
by the nature of the circumstance from so doing).

47

Confidentiality
The University understands that students may be reluctant to disclose confidential personal
information. However, students can be assured that all claims of extenuating circumstances
are deemed to be confidential to all members of staff who may be involved in their
consideration and will not be disclosed outside those meetings (i.e. Extenuating
Circumstances Panels, Unit Assessment and Progression and Award Boards, and Appeals
Panels where relevant).
If a student is reluctant to disclose information of a particularly personal nature, they may
enter the word ‘Confidential’ on the form in the boxes headed ‘Brief Description’ and
‘Comments’ and attach written evidence in a sealed envelope. The information will then be
made available only to the Chair of the Extenuating Circumstances Panel, the Chair of the
Unit Assessment Board, Chair of the Progression and Award Board and the relevant
external examiner.
Consideration of extenuating circumstances
Straightforward claims will be considered within 15 working days of submission by the
Academic Registrar. Students will be advised of the decision regarding their claim within
20 working days of submission by email.
The Academic Registrar will determine whether the extenuating circumstances submitted
are in accordance with the Regulations (that is, that they are exceptional, outside the
student’s control, and corroborated by appropriate independent documentary evidence). The
Academic Registrar must accept the professional recommendation of a medical practitioner
or qualified counsellor regarding the effect on a student of a particular condition or problem.
Complex claims will be referred to the Extenuating Circumstances Panel for consideration.
The University will convene an Extenuating Circumstances Panel to consider complex
claims. The Panel will include in membership the Deputy Vice-Chancellor (Chair), Academic
Registrar, an Assistant Dean, plus, if deemed necessary by the Chair, appropriate academic
staff who may include Course Leaders and tutors and/or welfare tutors as appropriate.
The purpose of the EC Panel meeting is to determine whether the extenuating
circumstances submitted are valid within the Regulations (that is, that they are exceptional,
outside the student’s control, and corroborated by appropriate independent documentary
evidence). A Panel must accept the professional recommendation of a medical practitioner
or qualified counsellor regarding the effect on a student of a particular condition or problem.
EC Panels will meet as required to consider complex claims and particularly those relating
to late submission of coursework.
A meeting of an EC Panel will not be invalidated by the unavoidable absence of any
member, provided that the Chair agrees that sufficient expertise is available to enable the
48

Committee to make informed decisions.
The EC Panel will:
●​
●​

make decisions about outcomes for complex cases referred to them
receive all claims relating to material administrative error and resolve any
outstanding issues around any EC claim

If a Panel does not consider that it has sufficient corroborating evidence the Chair of the
Panel will liaise with the Chair of the relevant Unit Assessment Board and the student as
appropriate in order to secure such additional evidence as may be deemed necessary.
Following each Panel meeting, students will be sent an email confirming the decision made
regarding their Extenuating Circumstances application, copied to their Course Leader.
The Academic Registrar will:
●​

●​

report outcomes of all EC claims to Progression and Award Boards through the
relevant Unit Assessment Board; this will be in the form of a list of all students
whose EC claims have been either upheld or not upheld
report overall data/trends/issues to Academic Standards and Quality Committee
including any identified staff or student development needs.

Misconduct
​

Submitting fraudulent claims for EC or falsifying evidence in support of an EC will be considered a
serious breach of the Code of Conduct and may be subject to non-academic disciplinary action.
Appeals
A student who has not submitted a claim of extenuating circumstances will not normally be
able to use extenuating circumstances as the basis for a subsequent appeal.

49

APPENDIX E
POWERS AND PROCEDURES RELATING TO UNIT ASSESSMENT BOARDS AND
PROGRESSION AND AWARD BOARDS
Unit Assessment Boards
Aims
The aims of Unit Assessment Board meetings are to:
●​

●​

●​
●​

confirm for presentation and consideration at Progression and Award Board the
final mark for each student in every unit for each course, ensuring that any
extenuating circumstances are taken fully into account and that any assessment
penalties have been correctly applied in accordance with academic regulations
confirm for presentation and consideration at Progression and Award Board the
award credit for the unit to every student who has demonstrated achievement of the
learning outcomes of those units
consider results for individual units to identify anomalies or trends for report to
Progression and Award Board and/or Academic Board as appropriate
consider external appraisal of the standards achieved by students and the quality of
the provision, the adequacy of all assessments used in each unit and
recommendations for future assessments

Authority
These meetings have no impact on the authority of the Progression and Award Board and
the responsibility for decisions taken at those Boards relating to the progression of students
in courses, the consequence of failure at any stage of a course, and recommendations to
Academic Board for the conferment and classification of awards.
Membership and responsibilities
Membership of Unit Assessment Board meetings are as follows:

●​ The Chair, who will be the Assistant Dean; with the exception of Postgraduate
provision where the Chair will be the Dean for Arts, Design & Media

●​ External Examiner for the relevant course(s)
●​ Course Leader for the relevant course(s) (including Academic Partnership Course Leaders
where appropriate)
●​ Unit Leaders of all units under consideration (including Academic Partnership Unit Leaders
where appropriate)
●​ Link Tutor(s) for courses delivered by Academic Partners
●​ Academic Registrar
In addition, the Deputy Vice-Chancellor has the right to attend and course tutors may be
invited to attend. A secretary will be appointed to record the proceedings of the meeting.

50

A Unit Assessment Board will be quorate if the Chair or nominated deputy, the relevant
External Examiner(s), Course Leader and Academic Registrar are present. However, with
the approval of the Deputy Vice-Chancellor, the Board may proceed if an External Examiner
is exceptionally unable to attend and has followed the procedure described in the External
Examiners Handbook.
The role of the External Examiner, the associated rights and responsibilities and the procedure to be
followed if the External Examiner is exceptionally unable to attend the meeting are described in the
External Examiners Handbook.
The Chair is appointed on the authority of Academic Board and is accountable to Academic
Board for ensuring that the Unit Assessment Board fulfils its responsibilities in accordance
with these procedures.
Unit Assessment Board meetings will use the standard University boardsheets for scrutiny
of unit results. The Academic Registrar is responsible for drafting and publishing the
schedule for Unit Assessment Boards and Progression and Award Boards. Course Leaders
are responsible for ensuring that accurate marks are entered into the Student Records
System. The Academic Registrar is responsible for ensuring these are presented correctly
to Unit Assessment Board meetings, with annotations where appropriate. The Academic
Registrar is also responsible for the co-ordination of agreed marks from Unit Assessment
Board meetings and the presentation of these marks to the appropriate Progression and
Award Board.
In addition to the membership, a person shall be appointed to act as Secretary to provide to
the Chair of the Board as soon as possible after the meeting a draft record of the
proceedings of the meeting including a list of those present and the capacity in which they
attended, all the decisions made and the reasons for them. The Chair is responsible for
ensuring that minutes are circulated to members as soon as reasonably practicable after the
meeting and that a copy is available for the Progression and Award Boards.
No student may attend any part of a meeting of a Unit Assessment Board, save that a
member of staff who is coincidentally registered as a student on another course of the
University shall not be disqualified from discharging normal assessment commitments.
A Unit Leader who is exceptionally unable to attend a meeting of a Unit Assessment Board
must provide written advice to the Board relating to the assessment of their unit(s). If,
exceptionally, they are unable to provide such advice, the Course Leader will investigate
the assessment of the unit and report to the Unit Assessment Board on behalf of the Unit
Leader.
If exceptionally, the designated UAB Chair is unable to attend, another Assistant Dean will
chair the Board.
All members are to bring to the Unit Assessment Board their own copies of relevant
unit descriptors, regulations etc.
51

In circumstances beyond the University’s control where it is not possible to convene a
normally constituted Unit Assessment Board, the Chair of Academic Board, having received
advice from the Deputy Vice-Chancellor, will determine the arrangements necessary to
conduct the business of the meeting. In such circumstances, the decision and the reasons
for it will be reported in full to the next meeting of the Academic Board.
Conduct
The Unit Assessment Board will receive:

●​
●​
●​
●​
●​

the minutes of its previous substantive meeting and any intervening meetings;
notification of any actions taken under delegated authority;
the current approved unit descriptor of each unit;
the requirements of course work and/or other assessments used as appropriate;
the name of any student alleged to have been guilty of academic misconduct in
relation to any of the units under consideration and details of any action taken in
relation to it;
●​ the previous annual report of the External Examiner and the University response;
●​ the record of any relevant accreditation of prior learning or experiential learning
●​ for each student:
o​ if appropriate, a report on any form of exchange (or similar activity) the overall mark for
the unit;
o​ a record against each assessment mark of any decision made by the Extenuating
Circumstances Panel;
o​ a record against each mark showing if it is the result of the application of an assessment
penalty, and if it is, the mark without penalty should also be available;
o​ a record against each mark showing if the mark has been capped at 40% due to pass
following any referral, or failed following any referral, together with the nature of the
referral
The Unit Assessment Board shall:

●​ agree the final version of the minutes of the previous meeting to be a true record of
that meeting and note any matters arising from them;
●​ receive the summary statistics available for each unit and identify any anomalies
which may require attention by the Board, or action for the next academic session;
●​ scrutinise the marks or grades relating to each unit and the analysis of the marks
and identify and obtain an explanation for any anomaly, or other cause for
concern, and record any recommendation considered necessary including where
advice should be sought from the External Examiner;
●​ taking into account any decisions of the Extenuating Circumstances Panel:
o​ confirm the marks for each candidate in each unit
o​ assign credit to individual students on the basis of the confirmed marks
or grades
o​ record decisions for referral and/or deferral assessments for those students
52

●​
●​
●​
●​

who have not been assigned credit;
o​ authorise the update of the Student Record System and notification of
confirmed marks to students
receive an oral report from each External Examiner concerning the standards
achieved by students and the quality of the provision
review the response to the previous External Examiner’s report and consider the
rationale for any recommendations that have not been acted upon
consider the adequacy of all assessments used in each unit and agree
recommendations for future assessments
formally delegate authority to Chair’s Action to resolve any cases arising from
referral or deferral, or where, subsequent to the meeting, students present reasons
and circumstances, considered by the Chair to be both acceptable and supported
by satisfactory evidence, which have led to a mark or grade being wrongly
confirmed. In all such cases the Chair must document such a recommendation, the
reasons for it, and the extent of any consultation and make report without delay to
the Registrar. Report must be made to the next meeting of the Unit Assessment
Board.

Moderation of Marks
Unit Assessment Boards may moderate marks as a collective decision, on the
recommendation of an external examiner and after reviewing the full range of information if,
in the opinion of the Board:

●​ the pass threshold has been incorrectly applied; or
●​ the marks do not fall within the expected mark distribution; or
●​ the Assistant Dean confirms that a department or course management issue has
either advantaged or disadvantaged all students taking the unit.
The Chair of the Unit Assessment Board must ensure that any moderation, and the
reason for it, is recorded in the minutes.
Assessment Penalties
Responsibility for the application of assessment penalties rests with the Unit Assessment
Board when it determines the final mark in the unit. All cases in which assessment penalties
have been applied or in which work has not been accepted for assessment shall be reported
to the Unit Assessment Board and to the Progression and Award Board.
The Unit Assessment Board has no discretion over penalties that may be imposed in
accordance with the University’s Academic Misconduct Procedure. In the event of such an
allegation coming to light at the meeting or being unresolved by the time of the meeting, the
Unit Assessment Board will make its decisions for recommendation in the normal way but
the Progression and Award Board will withhold them from the student until the outcome of
Academic Misconduct Procedures is known, annotating the boardsheet accordingly.
53

Where students are given target word counts or equivalents for an assessment, the
instructions for the assessment should make clear before the student undertakes the
assessment, by way of the relevant course specification, whether there are consequences
for exceeding or failing to reach the word count and if so what these are. If there are
consequences, these should be applied in the marking process and associated comments
should be made in the feedback to the student. If applicable, the Unit Assessment Board
should receive details of adjustments of this kind which are to be fully recorded in the
minutes.
Confirmation of Unit Marks
Unit Assessment Boards confirm marks awarded to individual students and unit cohorts. The
Unit Assessment Board has authority to review cohort results, but not individual student
marks. The unit mark will be a rounded integer as specified in these Academic Regulations.
In respect of each student on each unit, the Unit Assessment Board must make one of the
following decisions, which it will pass to the Progression and Award Board.
a)​ Progress. This confirms the student has completed all required elements of the
course at Extended BA/Foundation Year, Level 4, Level 5, Level 7 (PT) and can
progress to the next stage of their course
b)​ Pass. This confirms that the student has completed all required elements of the
course at all levels and is eligible for an award.
c)​ Referral. This confirms that the student has outstanding coursework that must be
submitted by the next award board.
d)​ Repeat. This confirms that the student is required to repeat the year at the next
available opportunity.
e)​ Early leaver. This confirms that the student has withdrawn from their course of
studies during the academic year and will be recommended for an exit award if
eligible.
f)​ Fail. This confirms that the student has failed to complete all required elements of
the course and has exhausted all opportunities for retrieval.
Unit Assessment Boards make recommendations to the Progression and Award Board
concerning students with failed units and/or units in which the assessment has not yet
taken place. Chairs of those Boards must ensure that notations appear after each unit
score on the unit boardsheet where such later assessment is recommended.
When the Unit Assessment Board has agreed the marks, with or without moderation, the
Chair and the External Examiner sign the exam board declaration, and the Chair and
Academic Registrar subsequently together confirm the submission of marks into the student
record. The significance of this process, and the procedure to be followed if the External
Examiner is unable or unwilling to sign the boardsheet, is described in the External
Examiners Handbook.
After the External Examiner has completed this process, no marks may be changed, other
than in exceptional circumstances and with the written agreement of the External Examiner.
54

Any changes to unit marks made at the Unit Assessment Board must be recorded in the
minutes.
Recommendations by Unit Assessment Boards
Unit Assessment Boards are required to make recommendations to Progression and
Award Boards for referred assessment for students with failed units and/or units for which
work has not yet been submitted, and for repeating study in accordance with Academic
Regulations where appropriate, clearly identifying between first or second attempt.
Unit Assessment Boards should also identify for the Progression and Award Board:
●​

●​

Individual units where compensation for failure may be awarded, particularly
where any students have failed the unit and compensation could therefore be
considered.
Where appropriate, where total marks fall within the boundary for uplift to a higher
classification of award; this should be highlighted for decision at Progression and
Award Board.

Interim Unit Assessment Boards
When the results of first semester or first term assessments are known, the University will
assess the engagement and progress of its undergraduate and postgraduate students. This
will be in the form of interim Unit Assessment Boards which follows the above procedures
for those units completed. External Examiners may not attend and the units covered will be
considered fully again at the end of year Unit Assessment Boards.
The purpose of the interim Unit Assessment Boards is to confirm the marks in units where
completed up to that point and assess such interim results for evidence of:

●​ Modules with a high number of fails
●​ Student profiles that demonstrate a downward or upward trend from previous
marks.
●​ Any queries related to registration or enrolment.
The interim boards have no authority to make any decisions regarding the progression or
continuing enrolment of any student or recommendations for the conferment of academic
awards. However, it provides opportunity for formal review, and to identify issues as above
to instigate early remedial action where appropriate for students encountering difficulties.
Extenuating Circumstances in relation to Unit Assessment Boards
General
Action relating to extenuating circumstances must be taken strictly in accordance with the
55

procedures as set out elsewhere in these Regulations. Extenuating circumstances are
circumstances that lessen or mitigate the apparent seriousness of academic failure. They
are temporary, abnormal and mostly unexpected circumstances that are beyond the
student’s control and that relate to a particular assessment or assessments. They are
claimed by an individual student and are verified either through certificated evidence or by
an appropriately qualified and impartial third party. Extenuating Circumstances do not
include long-term conditions or circumstances that affect learning.
The Extenuating Circumstances Panel maintains oversight of claims for extenuating
circumstances. Only the Academic Registrar is authorised to rule on the validity or otherwise
of a claim for extenuating circumstances. A Unit Assessment Board or Progression and
Award Board may not take into account any extenuating circumstances unless they have
been reported to and considered by the Academic Registrar or Extenuating Circumstances
Panel, and must then act in accordance with the recommendation of that panel.
Actions by Unit Assessment Boards
The Academic Registrar will notify Unit Assessment Boards via annotation on the
Boardsheets that valid Extenuating Circumstances apply to named students in specific
assessments in named units.
Unit Assessment Boards must, where valid Extenuating Circumstances have prevented the
student from submitting an assessment by the due date, waive the assessment penalty and
ensure the assessment attracts the full mark it justifies on its merits alone.
In other cases of valid Extenuating Circumstances, where no mark is recorded for an
assessment, Unit Assessment Boards may:

●​ permit the assessment of the unit in the form of the affected assessment(s) to be
deferred until specified dates;
●​ exceptionally, if it is not possible to replicate the original assessment, permit the
assessment of the unit by means of different assessment(s), which must be
defined and made known to the student, to be deferred until specified dates.
In relation to any assessment, an assessment penalty imposed following Academic Misconduct
Procedures over-rides any valid extenuating circumstances.
The Unit Assessment Board will minute all decisions reached in respect of valid
extenuating circumstances made known to it.
Chairs of Unit Assessment Boards must ensure that extenuating circumstances are
clearly annotated after each element of assessment on the unit boardsheets where
extenuating circumstances have been found valid whether or not the unit has been
passed.

56

Progression and Award Boards (PABs)
Aims
The primary aims of a Progression and Award Board are to:
●​

●​

●​

exercise oversight of assessment of awards to ensure that academic standards are
upheld, and decisions are made fairly and democratically in accordance with the
regulatory framework
to make decisions on progression for each student on a course and to make
recommendations to Academic Board on the award, and classification of award,
to be conferred upon individual students
to agree the form of referral for individual units

Membership
The following have membership rights of Progression and Award Boards:

●​ Chair, Dean of Arts, Design & Media , or in the case of Postgraduate programmes, Pro
●​
●​
●​

●​
●​

Vice-Chancellor (Academic)
Chief External Examiner(s) for awards under consideration
Chairs of the Unit Assessment Boards relevant to the PAB;
Dean of Academic Partner Institution(s)
Deputy Vice-Chancellor
Academic Registrar

In addition to the membership, a person shall be appointed to act as Secretary to provide to
the Chair of the Board as soon as possible after the meeting a draft record of the
proceedings of the meeting including a list of those present and the capacity in which they
attended, all the decisions made and the reasons for them.
The Chair is appointed on the authority of Academic Board and is accountable to Academic
Board for ensuring that the Progression and Award Board fulfils its responsibilities in
accordance with these regulations. The Deputy Vice-Chancellor and Academic Registrar
will advise and assist the Chair in this respect.
No student may be a member of a Progression and Award Board, save that a member of
staff or approved External Examiner who is coincidentally registered as a student on another
course in the University or elsewhere shall not be disqualified from discharging normal
examining commitments.
The Progression and Award Board, when recommending the conferment of an academic
award or considering the progression of students, shall be quorate with the following
membership:

●​ Chair
57

●​ Chief External Examiner(s) for awards under consideration
●​ Chairs or a nominee of the Unit Assessment Boards relevant to the PAB
●​

Deputy Vice-Chancellor or Academic Registrar

If exceptionally, a UAB Chair is unable to attend, the Board will be quorate provided an
appropriate individual is present at the Board to represent students on all courses under
consideration.
If exceptionally, the designated PAB Chair is unable to attend, the Deputy Vice-Chancellor
will chair the Board.
The role of the Chief External Examiner and the associated rights and responsibilities are
described in the External Examiners Handbook. If, exceptionally, the Chief External
Examiner is unable to attend the meeting, and the University is unable to arrange for one
of the External Examiners for units contributing to one or more of the awards to attend,
then the Chief External Examiner will:

●​ as far as possible, make their views known to the Board before it meets
●​ after the Board has met, write to the Chair of the Progression and Award Board
stating the reason for absence, the extent of their involvement with the processes
of assessment and signifying satisfaction with them - the letter shall not be
considered to signify agreement with every decision of the Progression and Award
Board
●​ the minutes of the meeting will record the express consent of the Chair and
agreement by the Chair of Academic Board to the continuation of the business of
the meeting.
In circumstances beyond the University’s control where it is not possible to convene a
normally constituted Progression and Award Board, the Chair of Academic Board, on advice
from the Registrar, will determine the necessary arrangements. In such circumstances, the
decision and the reasons for it will be reported in full to the next meeting of the Academic
Board.
Process and Powers
All named awards shall be assigned to the authority of a Progression and Award Board. The
Progression and Award Board shall convene meetings, to discharge the duties defined by
these regulations. Such meetings will take place according to a schedule determined by the
Academic Registrar.
In exercising the powers provided by these regulations, the Progression and Award Board
shall have due regard to the regulatory framework, the University’s Assessment and
Moderation Guidelines, the standard of the award, the identified aims and objectives of any
particular course and the individual candidate’s overall performance.
Only a Progression and Award Board constituted in accordance with these Regulations shall
58

be authorised to recommend conferment on a student of an academic award of Arts
University Plymouth taught courses.
The Progression and Award Board will receive:

●​ the minutes of its previous meeting and any intervening sub-committee(s);
●​ notification of any actions taken under the delegation of its authority at a previous
●​
●​

●​
●​
●​

●​
●​
●​

meeting
the relevant regulations, policies and procedures
an outline of the Assessment Regulations for Awards considered, noting any
units which are essential for an award or progression or are deemed
non-compensable and cannot be compensated
the confirmed marks and assigned credit from the appropriate Unit Assessment
Board(s) for each student registered for awards for which it is responsible
recommendations from Unit Assessment Board(s) regarding referrals for failed
units
a record against each unit of Extenuating Circumstances found valid, including
where appropriate recommendations by the Extenuating Circumstances Panel
regarding action that remains to be taken
the name of any student alleged to have had academic misconduct in relation
to a unit and details of any action
the annual report(s) of the Chief External Examiner(s)
the name of any student in breach of University regulations whose result is required
to be withheld

The Progression and Award Board will:

●​ agree the final version of the minutes of the previous meeting to be a true record of
●​
●​

●​

●​

●​
●​
59

that meeting and note any matters arising from them
note any actions taken under authority delegated at its previous meetings
for each student, where appropriate and in accordance with the regulatory
framework, make a decision regarding:
-​ progression to the next stage of a course
-​ referral for re-assessment, for repeating study and assessment
-​ deferral for later assessment due to valid extenuating circumstances
-​ withdrawal from their course of study on academic grounds
substitute for an earlier resit decision a requirement to repeat the assessment of a
unit for any student where the resit requirements have not been successfully
completed, subject to the constraints of these regulations
determine whether to exercise discretion to extend a candidate’s registration when
a candidate is otherwise excluded by the application of these or other University
regulations
recommend the conferment and categorisation of an award including, as
appropriate, Aegrotat award
authorise the publication of its decisions and recommendations

●​ consider the previous annual report/s of the Chief External Examiner(s) and the
University response, including a rationale for any recommendations that have
not been acted upon, and refer any matters of concern to Academic Board
●​ fulfil, as appropriate, any specific and additional requirements of any external
accrediting body for the award recognised by Academic Board.
●​ agree the date for Resit Board, and the next Progression and Award Board
Decisions
At the conclusion of each meeting the Chair, Chief External Examiner, and Deputy
Vice-Chancellor shall sign the Results Recommendation form.
The list of decisions shall show the name and/or Student Record System Identification
Number of each student and the decision of the Progression and Award Board. The
decision shall be one of the following:

●​ Progress: this confirms that the student may continue to the next stage of the
course.

●​ Recommend the award of [name of specific award]: this confirms that an
academic award is to be made to the student following, as appropriate, completion
of the course of study or withdrawal.

●​ Referred: this means that:
-​ further marks are to be confirmed and credit assigned following an opportunity to
make good failure in unit(s) before progression can be determined or an award
can be recommended, and/or
-​ there is insufficient information on which to make a decision, and/or
-​ that the student has not been awarded sufficient credit to allow progression or
the recommendation of an award, with the shortfall in credit due to valid
Extenuating Circumstances.
For any referred assessment, it must be made clear whether this will
remain a first attempt (e.g. for valid ECs where submission has not
been made) or further attempt for which the mark is capped at 40%,
and whether intermission is necessary. (Academic intermission offers
students the opportunity to take a break from continuous study in order
to redeem outstanding failures, or assessment which has been
deferred).
If the timing of any referred assessment would make normal progress
impracticable, it may be appropriate to consider repeat assessment.

●​ Repeat: this confirms that the student may not continue to the next stage of the
course or be recommended for an award until all the credit required has been
assigned following repeat assessment. Students must retake specified unit(s) and
60

unless specified otherwise indicates repeat assessment(s) in the next delivery of
the unit(s) to gain sufficient marks to pass the unit(s). In general, a decision for
repeat means that the entire year will be repeated with repeat assessment
required for those units failed. Marks for repeated unit(s) are capped at the unit
pass mark as appropriate for anything other than first attempt.

●​ Withdraw: this confirms that the student may not continue to study for the named
award for which she or he is registered at the University as a student. (This
decision does not necessarily prevent the student transferring registration to
another course of study within the University, subject to the agreement of the
Course Leader for that course).

●​ Decision Withheld: this confirms that one of the above decisions has been
determined but that it is not to be released yet, either because the student is in
breach of the University’s regulations in some respect or because the student has
to consider whether or not to accept the offer of an award prior to its
recommendation. The Decision is released by subsequent Chair’s Action.
The Academic Registrar shall ensure that, as soon as practicable after the Board,
sufficient further details of the Board’s decisions are supplied to each student that they can
exercise all of their rights under these and any other regulations of the University. In
particular, those further details must make clear any actions the student must complete in
order to retrieve any failure.
At the conclusion of the meeting, the Chair of the Progression and Award Board, the Chief
External Examiner and the Deputy Vice-Chancellor will sign the Board declaration form.
Signatures by the Chair of the Progression and Award Board and the Registrar confirm
compliance with these regulations in exercising the powers of the Board and making the
decisions listed. Endorsement by the Chief External Examiner on the Board Papers signifies
general satisfaction with the effectiveness and adequacy of the assessment processes, with
particular reference to the student profiles and issues of fairness. It does not necessarily
indicate agreement with every individual mark or recommendation of the Board.
Delegation
The Progression and Award Board will, by resolution, delegate to the subsidiary Resit Board
its authority in relation to the progression of, and recommendation of awards to, students
following referred / deferred assessment. The resolution must define the membership and
quorum of such subsidiary body and prescribe the reporting arrangements to the Board.
The Progression and Award Board will, by resolution, delegate to the Chair its authority in
relation to the progression and recommendation of awards to students arising from deferred
decisions and the release of withheld decisions. The resolution shall require the Chair to
document her or his decision, the reasons for it, and the extent of any consultation. The
resolution shall also require the Chair to report the decision to the next meeting of the Board.
The Progression and Award Board will, by resolution, delegate to the Chair its authority in
61

relation to the outcome of successful appeals. The Chair shall report any such decision to
the next meeting of the Board.
No authority of the Progression and Award Board can be delegated other than as defined
within this regulation.
Minutes
In the case of the exercise of the discretionary powers described below, the minutes must
include all the information specified within that regulation. In the case of the exercise of any
other discretionary powers under these regulations, the minutes shall record in full the
reasons for any decision to exercise discretion or not to do so.
The Chair of the Progression and Award Board shall ensure that approved draft minutes of
meetings are issued to members within a reasonable time and ahead of the next
Progression and Award Board meeting.
Authority to Depart Exceptionally from Academic Regulations
Within the constraints of the course objectives and good practice within the UK Higher
Education sector, the Progression and Award Board will have discretion, in exceptional
circumstances, to depart from the regulations under this clause if, in the opinion of the
Board, strict application of the regulations would be unjust to a student or students. The
Progression and Award Board will take advice from the Chief External Examiner in relation
to good practice in the sector.
In such a case the minutes must record all of the following information:

●​
●​
●​
●​

a reference to this exceptional authority to depart
the name of the student(s)
the regulation from which the Progression and Award Board wishes to depart
the full circumstances in which the Progression and Award Board considered it
necessary to exercise the discretionary power under this regulation
●​ the reason why the Progression and Award Board considered it necessary to
exercise the discretionary power under this regulation including specific mention of
the consequences of the exercise of discretion for the student and the
consequences of not exercising such discretion
●​ the advice of the Progression and Award Board External Examiner in relation to
good practice within the UK higher education sector
●​ the reason why such discretionary power should not be exercised in respect of
other students.
The Chair of the Progression and Award Board should report in writing to the Chair of
Academic Board with regard to the departure from the regulations.

62

Other Procedural Matters
The Academic Registrar will retain copies of boardsheets. At the end of the meeting the
secretary to the Board will collect and destroy all copies of the boardsheets distributed at the
start of the meeting. In the case of digital access to boardsheets, access to these will be
revoked at the end of the meeting.
All members of a Progression and Award Board and Unit Assessment Board must exercise
the strictest confidentiality regarding its proceedings. Board decisions are the decisions of all
its members jointly and severally, regardless of the members’ views before those decisions
were finalised.
Academic Board approval and dissemination of the decisions from Progression and
Award Boards
Following Progression and Award Boards, individual recommendations on progression and
award are made to the Chair of Academic Board, on behalf of Academic Board, for
approval.
Following this final approval by the Chair on behalf of Academic Board, the Academic
Registrar is responsible for communicating the decisions of the Board to students and
issuing statements relating to appeal procedures. Students whose results are not published
for any procedural reasons will simultaneously receive separate notification. The Academic
Registrar will retain award lists and details of any Chair’s actions taken after the Progression
and Award Board meeting.
The University will maintain a permanent record of all the academic awards it confers.
The Academic Registrar will submit a report of the conduct and outcomes of Assessment
and Award Boards to Academic Board for approval.

63

APPENDIX F
EXTERNAL EXAMINERS
Criteria for appointment
Potential external examiners are expected to meet the following criteria:
●​
●​
●​
●​
●​
●​
●​
●​

competence and experience in the field covered by the course(s)
academic or professional qualifications to at least the level of the qualification being
externally examined
experience of designing assessments and operating assessment procedures (either
internally or externally)
sufficient standing, credibility and breadth of experience within the discipline to be
able to command the respect of colleagues
familiarity with the standard to be expected of students in the course(s) to be
examined fluency in English
any criteria set out by relevant professional, statutory or regulatory bodies
awareness of contemporary developments in the design and delivery of relevant
curriculum
expertise in the enhancement of the student experience.

To avoid potential conflicts of interest, external examiners should not be nominated if they
are:
●​
●​
●​

closely associated with AUP, any member of its Board of Governors, staff or
students, or so associated through family relatives
required to assess colleagues who are students to the course of study
in a position to influence significantly the future of students on the course of
study involved in collaborative research activities with a member of AUP staff

External examiners should not normally hold more than two external examiner
appointments. Former members of staff and students may not be appointed as external
examiners until a period of at least five years has passed since they left the University.
Nominees who have retired (or who retire during their period of appointment) must be able
to demonstrate sufficient evidence of continuing involvement in the relevant discipline, and
with current developments in HE teaching, learning and assessment. There should normally
be no more than one external examiner from the same institution appointed at the
University. An external examiner should not be appointed from a department in an institution
where an AUP staff member is also serving as an external examiner. External examiners
who have completed their period of appointment may be re-appointed after a period of five
years has elapsed since their last appointment.
Nominees who are new to external examining can be appointed provided they are mentored
by the Chief External Examiner or, exceptionally, another External Examiner who meets fully
the criteria.
64

The University may consider nominees who do not fulfil all of the above criteria, for
example where an ideal candidate lacks experience in one area, or in small and specialist
areas where the pool of potential external examiners is restricted. Such cases need to be
highlighted to Academic Board and, if the appointment is approved, careful attention paid to
ensure appropriate training and support is provided beyond that of ‘standard’ mentoring.
Application and appointment
External examiners are appointed by Academic Board. They are sought by the Academic
Registrar through advertisement and also nomination by senior Academic staff. Nominated
candidates are approached by the Academic Registrar to make an application. All
candidates must provide a covering letter and CV for consideration in the first instance by
the External Examiners Committee, which is overseen by the Academic Standards and
Quality Committee on behalf of Academic Board. The Academic Registrar manages the
process.
External examiners are appointed for a term of office of 4 years. Exceptionally, with the
approval of Academic Board, a term of office may be extended beyond the 4-year maximum
by one year; for example, in order to provide continuity between external examiners or in
order to provide continuity for a course which is closing.
Academic Board has the authority to terminate the appointment of an external examiner if
they fail to fulfil their obligations; for example, through negligence or misconduct, or failure to
submit a written annual report by the due date.
Induction for external examiners
The Academic Registrar provides external examiners with all relevant information via the University’s
External Examiner site: https://sites.google.com/pca.ac.uk/pca-externalexaminers/home, which
includes the following:
●​
●​
●​
●​
●​
●​
●​
●​

AUP Academic Regulations
AUP HE Assessment and Moderation Procedures
AUP template for external examiners’ reports
Course documentation
AUP External Examiner handbook
Schedules for EE visits
External examiner reports from the previous two years and the University responses
Course staff information

All new external examiners shall be invited to an induction meeting at which their duties and
obligations will be outlined, and which will cover the following:
●​
●​
●​
●​
65

the role of external examiners and the relationship with assessment processes
AUP expectations of external examiners
terms of reference of external examiners
attendance by external examiners

●​
●​
●​
●​
●​
●​
●​
●​
●​
●​

purpose of the interim visit
online assessment and feedback
assessment Grading Matrices
sampling and verification, including the Internal Verification process
moderation and adjustment of marks
roles of Assessment and Award Boards
External Examiners’ Reports
rights and responsibilities of external examiners
course documentation
submission, assessment and feedback procedure

Terms of reference of external examiners
The terms of reference of external examiners are as follows:
●​

●​
●​
●​
●​

●​

●​

●​

●​

●​

●​

66

To make an annual visit to the course as part of final assessment procedures. All
examiners are also invited to make one interim visit per year, usually in February for
undergraduate courses. New external examiners will receive a welcome and
induction as part of their first interim visit.
To sample student work which will be (a) sent to the examiner at an agreed point(s)
during the academic year and (b) organised for visits by the examiner.
To review relevant documentation, including Course and Unit specifications, unit
guides, assessment documentation, tutorial records, and annual course reviews.
To meet with students and staff.
To verify that all candidates have been assessed fairly and in accordance with
these Regulations; have fulfilled the course learning outcomes at the appropriate
standard; and have been recommended for awards which reflect the level of their
academic achievement.
To meet with students either individually or in groups as part of the process of
sampling a range of academic achievement. Meetings may take place with groups
of students or with individuals. External examiners may undertake viva voce
examination of students.
To attend any and all meetings of the Unit Assessment Board of which they are a
member, and to endorse the results of the assessment process by appending their
signature to the Board results documentation.
To satisfy themselves that the conduct of business and decision making by AUP
Unit Assessment Boards and the documentation of their proceedings are
consistent with best practice in the sector.
To take part in appeals procedures when requested; this is not usual but may be
requested when considered necessary, as may ratification of marking of any new
submitted student work following successful appeal.
To report to the University for consideration by Academic Board the standards
achieved by students on the course, and on other matters as required by the
AUP template for external examiners’ reports.
To inform Academic Board of any matter which, in the examiner’s view, militates
against the maintenance of appropriate academic standards

In cases of suspected plagiarism or cheating, external examiners will be notified prior to their
visit and during their visit will be provided with the internal documentation relating to the
case. External examiners will not be asked to make a judgement but will be asked to confirm
that the correct internal procedures have been followed.
Rights and responsibilities
●​
●​
●​

●​

●​

●​

To attend any meeting of an Assessment or Award Board of which they are a
member. To see any assessment material relating to the course.
To be provided with details of work that students are required to produce for unit
assessment.
To inform internal assessors at the Assessment and Award Boards, and in general
discussion of assessment practice, of their views about internal assessment
procedures and decisions.
To meet with students in order to discuss assessed work as part of the sampling
process. To withhold endorsement of the results of assessment through not signing
the required documentation at the conclusion of Assessment and Award Boards.
To meet the Vice-Chancellor or their nominated representative in order to discuss
any matter relating to the course which the external examiner has declared a
matter of principle. The decision of the external examiner shall either be accepted
as final by the Progression and Award Board or shall be referred to Academic
Board. Where there is a disagreement within a group of external examiners on any
matter which is declared to be a matter of principle, and this cannot be resolved
within the group, the dispute must be referred to Academic Board.
To write directly and in confidence to the Vice-Chancellor on any matter that
presents serious concern relating to academic standards. In such cases, student
representatives on the relevant course will be informed that a confidential report
has been made. They will also be informed if there are implications for students,
and if so, what these are. If an external examiner has serious concerns about
issues related to academic standards at AUP, and has exhausted all internal
procedures including such a confidential report to the Vice-Chancellor, the
examiner should refer to the QAA’s Concerns scheme.

Guidelines on sampling and verification by external examiners
At both undergraduate and taught postgraduate level, verification by external examiners is
undertaken on the basis of sampling of students’ work across the range of classifications
(undergraduate) or marks and grades (postgraduate), to ensure that appropriate standards
of assessment are being maintained by internal assessors. Sampling rationalises the
external examination process and allows examiners to spend more time with the students
and work in the sample. The sample of work from a course unit must include all items of
assessment which contribute to the overall unit assessment requirements, including any
written work.
At undergraduate level, the unit sample selected by the Course Leader must include the
following:
67

●​
●​
●​
●​

work by all students whose proposed unit mark is a failure, at Levels 5 and 6.
work by all students whose proposed unit mark is First Class, at Levels 5 and 6
5 other pieces of student work to represent the cohort
In the case of temporary enforced University closure as a result of disaster or national
emergency and disruption to teaching and assessment, External Examiners are only
required to sample Level 6 work, noting that work assessed at Level 5 will have been seen
at interim visits, and that the Chief External Examiner will continue to participate in all
Progression & Award Boards.

At taught postgraduate level, the unit sample selected by the Course Leader must include
the following:
●​

work by all students whose proposed Masters Project grade is in the Distinction
classification
●​ work by all students whose proposed unit grade is a failure
●​ ​ 5 other pieces of student work to represent the cohort
Moderation and adjustment of marks by external examiners
The external examiner’s task is to moderate assessments from an appropriate sample of
students’ work, not to act as an additional marker. External examiners may moderate
students’ results collectively where they consider that the overall assessments have been
too high, too low or do not span an appropriate spread of the whole range of possible marks
Moderation of cohort marks (undergraduate courses) or grades (postgraduate courses) must
be proposed and ratified at the meeting of the relevant Unit Assessment Board. The
guidance set out below must be followed when external examiners and internal assessors
are considering the moderation of cohort marks or grades:
●​
●​

●​

●​

68

the pattern of marks/grades in the sample may be used as the basis for moderation
of the marks of an overall cohort of students
examiners may choose or may be asked by the Course Leader to consider the
work of a wider group of students if the marks or grades of the original sample
cannot initially be verified.
external examiners may recommend adjustments to individual unit marks/grades
where these are, in their view, anomalous, or with reference to the overall
mark/grade profile of the cohort. Following discussion with the course team, the
external examiner may ask the course team to review a mark/grade. Where
possible, changes should be agreed in advance of the Unit Assessment Board.
The mark(s) must not be changed on the mark spreadsheet before the meeting of
the Unit Assessment Board. All proposed change(s) to marks must be verbally
reported to the Unit Assessment Board by the Course Leader, and ratified by the
Unit Assessment Board.
where course teams and examiners are unable to reach agreement about
proposed changes to unit marks/grades prior to the relevant Unit Assessment
Board, the case for any such changes must be discussed by the Board. A

majority of the Board must agree on whether the proposed change(s) should be
implemented. Where the view of the Board is evenly divided, the Chair will take
the final decision with the advice of the Deputy Vice-Chancellor or their
representative.
External examiners’ reports
Each external examiner submits an annual report to AUP after the summer assessment
period (undergraduate awards) or the September assessment period (postgraduate awards),
with the actual dates confirmed in advance each year by the Registry. Examiners’ reports
are considered by Academic Standards and Quality Committee and reported to Academic
Board.
Examiners’ reports are circulated from the Registry with the template for Responses to
External Examiners’ Reports to the relevant Assistant Dean, Course Leader and copied to
the Pro Vice-Chancellor (Academic) and Dean. It is the responsibility of the Course Leader
to ensure that all members of the course team receive a copy of the external examiner’s
report. Responses to external examiners’ reports are developed following the approved
AUP template.
Recommendations made by external examiners, together with other matters raised in their
reports, are considered by course teams, Assistant Deans and Dean of Arts, Design &
Media, and other staff as appropriate. The Pro Vice-Chancellor (Academic) should be
notified of any issues requiring urgent attention. Course Leaders make written responses to
examiners’ reports on the Responses to External Examiners’ Reports template, that are
approved by Assistant Deans. Reports and responses are considered as part of the annual
monitoring process through course team annual evaluation meetings (July-September)
Curriculum Review Meetings (October) and at the autumn meeting of Academic Standards
and Quality Committee.
Chief External Examiner reports
The Chief External Examiner submits annual reports to AUP after the summer assessment
period for Undergraduate awards and the September assessment period for Postgraduate
Awards. These reports will be based on the reports submitted by individual external
examiners. Academic Standards and Quality Committee and reported to Academic Board.
It is the responsibility of the Pro Vice-Chancellor (Academic) to respond to the Chief External
Examiner report, using the response template provided by Registry.
The Academic Registrar prepares an institutional overview of common themes and
recommendations from external examiners’ reports, including the comparability of standards,
for consideration by the Academic Quality and Standards Committee.
The completed responses to External Examiners’ Reports proformas are circulated to
external examiners as part of the Annual Monitoring Reports. External Examiner reports
69

are made available to students through the Virtual Learning Environment.
The payment of annual fees and expenses is conditional on receipt of the examiner’s written
annual report.
If an external examiner’s written annual report has not been received by the Registry by 31
August (undergraduate courses) or 31 October (postgraduate courses), the University shall
formally write to the examiner, drawing attention to this matter and advising them that, if the
report is not received within a further month, their appointment shall be terminated with
immediate effect.

70

APPENDIX G
AUP APPEALS PROCEDURE
The appeal procedure
The appeal procedure is provided to enable students to appeal the decisions of Progression
and Award Boards and the assessment process which gives rise to these. An appeal is not
the appropriate procedure to deal with problems experienced with the delivery of your
course, supervisory issues or the availability of facilities, for example. You should use the
University’s complaints procedure to pursue these issues. If, when considering your appeal,
we believe issues you raise would be dealt with more appropriately via the complaints
procedure, we will advise you about this and how we propose to address these issues with
you. In some circumstances it may be appropriate for us to consider some issues by way of
your appeal, and others as a complaint, and if this is the case we will make this clear to you.
The University Complaints Procedure for Students is available on the Student Portal, in the
Student Handbook and also from the University website at the following page:
https://www.aup.ac.uk/misc/legal-information/making-a-complaint/
Students studying at Academic Partners should follow the Academic Appeals Procedure of the
Partner in the first instance, and Partners should ensure that the information on this Procedure is
made available to students. Partners are required to inform Arts University Plymouth of any appeals
raised by students and the outcome, and to provide the Link Tutor with a copy of the communication
with the student regarding the appeal. If a student remains dissatisfied, they can lodge an appeal
with AUP using these regulations, including a copy of the appeal submitted to the Partner and the
outcome.
Grounds for appeal
The University will only consider an appeal where you can produce evidence that:
●​ assessments were not conducted in accordance with the current Assessment
Regulations
●​ some other material irregularity, related to assessment, has occurred
●​ the mark(s) and/or result published by the University contains grammatical or
other errors of fact
●​ that there is evidence of prejudice or of bias such that the validity of the result of
assessment(s) is called into question.
Appeals against academic or professional judgement will not be considered –
disappointment with your results if your marks were accurately recorded, assessment
regulations were followed and there is no evidence of material irregularity does not
constitute grounds for appeal. Nor is the level of your marks in itself evidence of any
irregularity.
If you have a query regarding a mark awarded, this should be addressed to the Course
Leader in the first instance as it may be that your query can be resolved through further
discussion without requiring an appeal.
71

Extenuating Circumstances
Extenuating circumstances which you did not submit to your Course Leader before the
Progression and Award Board will only be considered as grounds for appeal in the most
exceptional circumstances (normally only because you were unable to disclose the
circumstances prior to the Board e.g. because of a medical condition). Since the University
allows you to submit extenuating circumstances under confidential cover, the fact that you
did not wish to disclose personal information will not normally be considered as an
exceptional circumstance.
Any claim of extenuating circumstances which you wish to use as grounds for appeal must be
accompanied by appropriate corroborating evidence. Please note that evidence such as a doctor’s
note must have been written at the time you were suffering from the illness – retrospective
documentary evidence or a doctor’s note which states that the GP has been informed that you were
ill on a certain date is not acceptable.
You may wish to consult the University’s regulations on late coursework and extenuating
circumstances, which are available on the student portal and which indicate what kind of
circumstances may be considered valid and what corroborative evidence is acceptable.
Please also refer to the section on “The outcome of your appeal” below. If you are in any
doubt, please contact the Academic Registrar registry@aup.ac.uk and/or telephone 01752
203450.
If you make an appeal based on extenuating circumstances which is exceptionally allowed to
proceed by the Appeal Panel, and your case is referred back to the Progression and Award
Board for re-consideration, you should expect the outcome to be that you be given a further
attempt to re-take any assessments affected by your extenuating circumstances, so that you
can demonstrate your competence when you are unaffected by the difficulties which
impacted on your previous attempt. If the affected attempt was a first attempt, you would
normally be given a further first attempt.​ If it was a second or final attempt, you would be
given a further second or final attempt.
How your appeal will be considered
Your appeal must be submitted to the Academic Registrar at the address shown on the
proforma and not to your Course Leader. Once your appeal proforma is received by the
Academic Registrar, your case will be investigated.We will ask your Course Leader and/or
any other relevant staff to provide any information relating to the appeal and we may also
need to ask you to provide further information. Please respond to any requests for additional
information as quickly as possible, so that your case can be considered. Your appeal will be
considered on the basis of the information you provide, so please also ensure you include all
information you wish to be considered.
Once we have all the relevant information, your case will be submitted to the Appeal Panel.
The Panel is chaired by the Pro Vice-Chancellor (Academic) and will comprise the Dean for
Arts, Design & Media, Assistant Deans and at least three members of academic staff and
one student representative (normally the Student Union President), none of whom will be
72

from the course on which you are registered. The Academic Registrar coordinates the
Appeal Panel and the Panel will decide on what action will be taken on your appeal.
The decision of the Progression and Award Board stands until it is changed, so if you are
required to take referred examinations, for example, you should prepare for them. It may be
that the University is unable to determine the outcome of your appeal before resits/the
referred submission deadline and so you will need to complete referred work and/or resits as
originally required. Please note that, in some cases, the assessment regulations require that
you repeat the year and you will need to take into consideration the implications of this for
you, for example any financial implications.
Please note that staff from your course or other academic staff that may be relevant to your
appeal cannot make comments on your appeal or progress with it once submitted. If you
have any questions please write to the Academic Registrar.
The outcome of your appeal
Once the Appeal Panel has made a decision on your case, we will inform you of the
outcome in writing. The letter to you will be in the form of a Completion of Procedures letter.
It will explain the rationale for the decision and will also confirm that the University Appeal
Procedures have been completed. If you are dissatisfied with the outcome from your appeal
you may be able to take your appeal further to the Office of the Independent Adjudicator
(OIA) subject to their rules of eligibility.
The Office of the Independent Adjudicator
The Office of the Independent Adjudicator for Higher Education (OIA) runs an independent
scheme to review student complaints. Arts University Plymouth is a member of this scheme.
If you are unhappy with the outcome you may be able to ask the OIA to review your appeal
(or complaint). You can find more information about making a complaint to the OIA, what it
can and can’t look at and what it can do to put things right
here: https://www.oiahe.org.uk/students/ .
You normally need to have completed the Appeals Procedure detailed here (or exhausted
the Complaints Procedures for Students) before you complain to the OIA. AUP will send you
a letter called a “Completion of Procedures Letter” when you have reached the end of our
processes and there are no further steps you can take internally. If your appeal or complaint
is not upheld, AUP will issue you with a Completion of Procedures Letter automatically. If
your appeal or complaint is upheld or partly upheld, you can ask for a Completion of
Procedures Letter if you want one. You can find more information about Completion of
Procedures Letters and when you should expect to receive one
here: https://www.oiahe.org.uk/providers/completion-of-procedures-letters .

73

APPENDIX H
CERTIFICATION OF AWARDS AND SUPPLEMENTARY CERTIFICATION
Certification – Current Students
Certificate of Award
The Certificate of Award will be unique to Arts University Plymouth and provide record of:
●​
●​
●​
●​
●​
●​

Arts University Plymouth as the degree awarding body
the student's name
the award, including classification if appropriate
the validated title of the course
date of the award
the certificate will bear the authorised signatures of AUP

Diploma Supplement
A Diploma Supplement will be produced and issued by the Registry to all students who
successfully complete their award, after each Progression and Award Board.
The Diploma Supplement will contain:
●​
●​
●​
●​
●​
●​
●​
●​
●​

information about the student;
information identifying the qualification undertaken;
information on the level of qualification undertaken;
information on the contents of the qualification and mode of study;
transcript of results (see 1.3 for contents);
information on grading criteria;
information on function of the qualification;
any additional information;
information on HE qualification levels in England, Wales & Northern Ireland; description of
HE in England, Wales & Northern Ireland

Transcript
A Transcript will be issued to all students who successfully complete any elements of an
approved course of study, after each Assessment Board meeting.
The Transcript will be produced and issued by the Registry and indicate:
●​ the name of the student;
●​ the academic year of study to which the Transcript refers and date of issue;
●​ the elements of study successfully completed, with details of level and mark/grade

achieved, together with the Credits awarded.

74

.
Certification – Former Students
Duplicate Certificate of Award
A student who has lost a certificate of award should contact the Registry for the appropriate
form of application for a duplicate. The University (or validating institution) will charge a fee
for such provision.
Transcripts (Historical)
Official (historical) transcripts are produced by the Registry for former students applying for
entry to, for example, postgraduate courses, or for exemption from the requirements of
professional bodies. The University will charge a fee for physical copies.

75

APPENDIX I
BOARDS - FLOW DIAGRAM

Document version control
Document title:

Academic Regulations

Effective Date:

September 2025

Approving bodies / dates:

Academic Board, June 2025

Version:

1

Supersedes:

●​ AUP Academic Regulations 2024-25

Previous review dates:

N/A

Next review date:

June 2026

Related Statutes, Ordinances,
& General Regulations

QAA Quality Code for HE

Related policies:

●​ Admissions Policy
●​ HE Student Attendance & Engagement Policy
●​ Student Debt Policy
●​ Student Transfer Policy

Related procedures

●​
●​
●​
●​

Related information:

●​ External Examiner Handbook

Assessment and Moderation Procedures
Complaint Procedures for Students
Disciplinary Procedures for Students
Support for Study Procedures
●​ Tutorial Practice Guidelines
●​ Partnerships Operational Handbook

Policy owner and Lead contact:

Academic Registrar
Email: mcampbell@aup.ac.uk
