Learning, Teaching
and Assessment
Framework

2

THE AUB LEARNING, TEACHING AND ASSESSMENT FRAMEWORK

Contents
01

02

03

Foreword from our Principal and Vice Chancellor

03

Our Approach to Learning, Teaching and Assessment
Introductory Context and Principles
	Our University Values: Collaboration,
Connection, Innovation and Passionate

04

The Regulatory Framework
	Regulatory Framework for Undergraduate
and Postgraduate Taught Courses
Appendix A: Awards available
AUB Roadmap and Guidance
	Constructing courses
	Delivery
	Assessment
	Assessment Feedback

06
07

14
16

32
34
35
38
42
51

3

THE AUB LEARNING, TEACHING AND ASSESSMENT FRAMEWORK

Foreword from our Principal
and Vice Chancellor
Our Values at AUB put an emphasis on collaboration and
connection, on industry-partnered learning that is designed
to enrich every aspect of our curriculum. Through studio
practice, technical demonstration and applied knowledge,
our students exemplify the spirit of the reflective practitioner
– aware, informed, experiential. Yet, as the Learning, Teaching
and Assessment Framework proves, we aim higher.
The LTAF has been co-designed to offer a radically creative approach to arts education,
attuned to the era of automation and artificial intelligence but grounded in the disciplines that
are at the heart of the AUB ethos; I commend the huge effort that has gone into its design.
We remain acutely aware as educators, that our graduates are at the vanguard of
enterprise creation: AUB is one of the leading UK universities in propagating start-ups, young
businesses, and emerging entrepreneurs. The LTAF embraces this achievement, building
a framework that will not only ensure the continued quality, inclusivity, and equity of our
increasingly diverse education provision, but nurture and promote the very spirit of creative
enterprise that make us a unique institution of arts, design, media, and performance.

Paul Gough
Principal and Vice Chancellor
Arts University Bournemouth

Our Approach to
Learning, Teaching
and Assessment
4

THE AUB LEARNING, TEACHING AND ASSESSMENT FRAMEWORK

01

5

SECTION 1: OUR APPROACH TO LEARNING, TEACHING AND ASSESSMENT

Aims
A1

Provide and maintain the highest quality and consistency of experience
across all taught undergraduate and postgraduate courses.

A2

Present our vision for learning, teaching and assessment which is credible,
progressive and innovative.

A3

Promote learning, teaching and assessment as an experiential journey
accessible to all our students.

A4

Prepare our students for their future in the creative industries, their
future practice, or a portfolio career across a diversity of graduate roles.

A5

Pursue excellence to ensure that our curriculum is enlightened, agile
and meaningful for AUB now and in the future.

6

SECTION 1: OUR APPROACH TO LEARNING, TEACHING AND ASSESSMENT

Introductory
Context and Principles
The Arts University Bournemouth (AUB) Learning, Teaching
and Assessment Framework (LTAF) sets out the University’s
signature pedagogy and its approach to learning delivery
within the creative and performing arts.
Section One sets out the philosophical
underpinning of pedagogy at AUB; Section
Two is the formal regulatory framework,
applicable to all taught undergraduate and
postgraduate courses leading to awards
of AUB and Section Three details the taught
delivery approaches at AUB ensuring that
we remain student-centred in all that
we do, but with sound and supportive
mechanisms for all our staff.
A primary purpose of the LTAF is to support
reasonable student expectations, and to
deliver consistency and transparency in
learning, teaching, assessment and the
wider student academic experience.
Everything we do should reflect the AUB
values and support us in achieving our
strategic goals, and this includes the LTAF:
our organisational principles, purpose
and direction wrap around and permeate
through all aspects and levels of the
framework in order to set the tone for our
interactions with our students, our staff
and all of our stakeholders.
The LTAF has been designed to be
sufficiently flexible to not only enable
our Schools and Courses to maintain
and enhance their distinctiveness but also
to aid in their ongoing development for the
future. As such, the framework should be
read as a live document open to review,
critique and, inevitably, change.

AUB prides itself on being a civic university
with global connections. We aim to maximise
the opportunities of our identity and
reputation to make a lasting difference to
the prospects of our region and beyond.
The LTAF embraces the idea of making a
difference and ensures that our curriculum
is clear, transparent and inclusive to all
students in its principles and aims, with
the hope of equipping all our students with
the ingredients for success in a diverse
and rapidly evolving world.
The AUB Learning Teaching and
Assessment Framework is a publicly
accessible document which assures all
our stakeholders that we not only prioritise
currency, clarity and relevance in who
we are and what we do but also that we
embrace the inherent ambiguity of the
future: values-driven; community focused;
student-centred and industry-partnered.
Here at AUB we consider that learning,
teaching and assessment are an experiential
journey which starts before our students
join us and continues after they have left.
This document acts as the vehicle through
which that experience can be understood
and appreciated.

7

SECTION 1: OUR APPROACH TO LEARNING, TEACHING AND ASSESSMENT

Our University Values:
Collaboration, Connection,
Innovation and Passionate
Arts University Bournemouth comprises a portfolio of postgraduate,
undergraduate and short courses which encompass the collective
values, philosophies, identities and aims which are intrinsic to the
experience of the University that our staff and students share.
1. Collaboration
The learning and teaching journey at AUB
promotes collaboration from the moment
that students join us: working together with
a diverse community; sharing ideas and
experiences with colleagues from a wide
range of social and cultural backgrounds
and engaging in projects that enable
each student to learn collectively whilst
celebrating their individuality.
Collaboration is inherent to contemporary
working practices and acts as a microcosm
of the creative industries. The safe and
accessible application of collaborative
working environments are conducive
to student learning and help them to
develop their respect for difference
and forge honesty.
Fundamental to a collaborative working
environment is the design of the curriculum,
more specifically the place of contextual
learning and teaching within our practice.
Contextual learning and teaching at AUB
is understood in its broadest sense, not
only the valuable historical and theoretical
bases of our disciplines to date but also
the wider social, political, cultural, industrial
and specialist frames of reference that will
influence and direct our students’
practice in the future.

Our curricula demonstrate the fusion
of contextual and practical elements at
all stages and levels of study, aligning the
meaningful and impactful interrogation
of history, theory, culture and society
with our students’ own interests and their
likely career paths.
Collaboration at AUB acts as a force to
positively reshape a more diverse and
inclusive working environment for the future.

2. Connection
We welcome students at AUB from a
diversity of backgrounds and nationalities;
we aim to meet all students with an inclusive
curriculum delivery that is reflexive, agile and
engaging, built to connect with every learner.
The learning experience at AUB is designed
to be accessible to all individual learners,
their unique abilities and skillsets; learning
fit to build an increasingly equitable creative
industries of the future.
In preparation for the globalised world
into which our students graduate, the AUB
curriculum encompasses the plethora of
histories and peoples which shape, make
and challenge our disciplines and heritage.
Learning on our courses enables students
to relate their study and making to their own
lived experiences, as well as being able to
better understand and relate to different
people, cultures and ideas.

8

SECTION 1: OUR APPROACH TO LEARNING, TEACHING AND ASSESSMENT

Learning and teaching at AUB is accountable
to its learners and our courses are operated
and revised in ongoing partnership with
students. Students from demographic
minority groups on campus participate in
ongoing discussions on the AUB curricula and
students have flexibility and input into their
learning pathways, which generates more
autonomy in their learning experiences.
When students join AUB they do not
relinquish the lived experience and sense
of belonging to their own communities
but, instead, enrich our shared vision of an
inclusive and diverse local and international
learning community.
Diversification
Our curricula must be built to connect
with every learner.
In doing so, we acknowledge and aim to
challenge the historical and contextual
realities of colonialism, imperialism and
systems of oppression that have and
do exist and which shape and influence
our disciplines.
Both our students and our staff are
encouraged in an ongoing critical
evaluation and challenge to the conscious
and unconscious biases and assumptions
that underpin our shared knowledge base;
to introduce a range of perspectives,
voices and experiences and to give equal
opportunity to marginalised communities
as well as the work of scholars and
academics who have been traditionally
under-represented.
Partnership – our students and staff
Everyone at AUB enjoys a co-operative,
reciprocal relationship with all who work
at the university: we all have obligations
as learners, lecturers, researchers,
technicians and professional services staff
to be clear on the context in which we
work; collaborative in the use of resources
and showing respect in how we behave
and communicate.

We understand the value of working as
effective, cross-functional teams of
academic, technical and professional
services staff who embed collaboration
and sharing in order to challenge silo-thinking
and remove barriers to achieve a genuinely
supportive university experience.
Partnership – our external supporters,
stakeholders and industries
AUB prides itself on being close to, reflecting
and leading the diverse industries where
our graduates do and will work. In order
to maintain and develop our effective
connection we develop our staff to
ensure that they are always looking
up and looking out to ensure that we
are genuinely readying our students
for life and work now and in the future.
Meaningful industry relationships are an
embedded commitment in our curricula:
all courses have an industry patron whose
primary purpose is to help our students
grow the workplace knowledge and skills
for developing and leading the cultural and
creative institutions of the future; every
course incorporates opportunities for
industry engagement, such as placement,
year-out and graduate attributes,
employability skills and work-based
learning are fundamental to the design
of our courses at every level.
Students at every level are actively
encouraged to undertake exchange or
study-abroad opportunities whilst they
are with us. Whether this be through
international industry engagement or with
partner institutions overseas, having some
experience of the global network in which
we all operate is an important part of the
University’s overall educational offer.

9

SECTION 1: OUR APPROACH TO LEARNING, TEACHING AND ASSESSMENT

3. Innovation
Technology
Our students are progressing into a future
where traditional disciplinary silos will have
broken down, a future that will be evermore skilful and technologically challenging.
This demands that we build on established
teaching methods through an increasingly
broad, inter-, and cross-disciplinary
education that will expect an understanding
of the role of computation across the
arts, design and media: creativity needs
technology just as much as technology
needs creativity.
We understand that digital technologies and
emerging technologies are not a bolt-on,
nor an optional consideration for curriculum
design or teaching and learning. They
are essential to the employability of our
students and therefore must run through
the various strands of the Learning, Teaching
and Assessment Framework as well as at all
levels of the university in order that AUB can
develop its own digital leaders who will be
confident to model good digital practice
and innovative approaches to others.
AUB recognises that digital technologies
inhabit and touch on all aspects of our
lives but that they need to develop and
work alongside our excellence in the
traditional skills that underpin our courses:
our maker culture.
It is vital that in this section of the LTAF we
include our position on Artificial Intelligence
(AI). The University recognises the power
and the potential value of Generative
Artificial Intelligence (Gen AI), and we support
its constructive use to support learning,
teaching and assessment. Gen AI can
contribute to a high-quality educational
experience; used responsibly, it can
enhance student learning. In addition,
it is important that students understand
both the benefits and limitations of Gen
AI so that they are able to make informed
decisions about its use in their subsequent
professional lives.

We aim to ensure that our students will not
only be able to access the most effective
combination of analogue and digital
technologies but also understand that
innovation draws inspiration from a social,
inclusive, and politically aware context that
will drive not only their education but also
the industries into which they progress.
Active Learning
Our learning and teaching practice will
promote and encourage innovation
through a student-centred, active-learning
strategy that moves the focus away from
the tutor, towards interdisciplinary teams,
using appropriate technologies to support
students in developing peer relationships,
deeper learning and greater understanding
of their disciplines.
Graduate Futures
The University understands that our
students are faced with a world that is
undergoing change at an ever-increasing
rate and across all areas of our lives:
technological, social, cultural, political,
economic and environmental.
In this context, the University has
recognised the importance of developing
graduates who have the attributes to be
able to build their career, adapt to different
circumstances, embrace change.
As a specialist arts institution, one of our
strategic goals is to create opportunity and
support the building of competencies for
our students, alumni, and staff through a
passionate belief in collaboration, creativity,
and innovative practice. We want to ensure
that AUB graduates build on our AUB
values and graduate attributes, developing
meaningful careers and making a positive
impact on society.

10

SECTION 1: OUR APPROACH TO LEARNING, TEACHING AND ASSESSMENT

Graduate Attributes
Our Graduate Futures skills are defined as
set of achievements – skills,
“ Aunderstandings
and personal
attributes that make graduates
more likely to gain employment
and be successful in their chosen
occupations, which benefits
themselves, the workforce, the
community, and the economy.

”

Through an innovative, rigorous, and
inclusive curriculum informed by current
industry practice, students will have every
opportunity to develop the skills and
attributes necessary to find graduate
level work post-graduation.
Graduate Attributes are linked to
employability, but their purpose is not only
to help students identify and articulate
their skills to get jobs – it is about helping
students recognise the personal skills,
attitudes, behaviours and values they
have developed through their studies,
and how this makes them adaptable
and ambitious and encourages them
to think in the broadest terms about
their skills and competencies.

Our courses will introduce students to
topics which are integrated within the
curriculum at every stage of their learning.
This will allow the student to structure
their career development journey through
each level of their course and consider
the following stages: Self Awareness,
Opportunity Awareness, Decision Making
and Transitioning into Work. These align to
the AUB Career Readiness stages: Explore,
Focus, Engage and Achieve, which have been
developed in the Graduate Futures Toolkit.
Such an approach is designed to support
the student in the next steps they take after
graduation, in whatever direction those may
be, and is fundamental to study at AUB.

11

SECTION 1: OUR APPROACH TO LEARNING, TEACHING AND ASSESSMENT

4. Passionate
Educating the “whole student”.
The Learning Teaching and Assessment
Framework is the demonstration of our
commitment towards the education of
the “whole-student”: a holistic approach
that moves beyond the acquisition of skills
and knowledge to include ethical, social and
psychological wellbeing and development,
in a way that, as far as we reasonably
can, considers the strengths, needs and
interests of the student.
We pride ourselves on providing a supportive
and inclusive learning community that
nurtures a sense of belonging through
the creation of a space in which our
students feel comfortable and confident
to be themselves.
The Framework reiterates our pledge to
the principle and promotion of freedom
of thought, speech and expression for our
students, staff and external stakeholders,
and their exercise of those rights within
the law.
Our courses work to mitigate potential
isolation, separation and loneliness by
enabling students to develop and build
networks both within and beyond their
immediate study groups.
Our teaching and learning practice aims
to embed diversity in all aspects of our
curricula as well as enabling accessibility,
parity and consistency in the design of
our units, their aims and outcomes.
We will ensure that our assessment
and feedback practices and processes
are designed to facilitate learning and
success; prepares students to be critical
and creative learners; are aligned to the
Learning Outcomes; are relevant to current
and future learning; supports accurate
academic judgements on student learning,
progress and achievement; supports
students to engage in meaningful reflection
on their learning; are rigorous in evidencing
the work undertaken by the student; are
clear and explicit, inclusive and equitable; is

timely, clear, respectful, and consistent with
the expectations of the assessment task
and, above all, supports students to make
informed decisions about their current
and future learning and development.
Education accessible to all
and inclusive of everyone
The University not only aims to advance
its moral, social and legal obligations to
put equity at the centre of everything it
does but also, through a whole-institution
approach, commits to providing access to
education for all students irrespective of
their background. In doing so, we want to
ensure that any barriers to success and
progression are removed.
We understand that students from
underrepresented backgrounds, seeking
a creative education and careers in the
creative industries, can be under greater
pressure from their families to study more
traditional disciplines. We are dedicated to
a range of complementary approaches to
enable students’ successful progression
to highly skilled employment or higher-level
study that are embedded at all levels
across the university:
— supporting and promoting diversity
across all our community
— delivering high-quality, innovative
teaching which eliminates barriers
to engagement and success
— developing academic and professional
practice that raises awareness of cultural
barriers and challenges implicit bias
— implementing a curriculum in which all our
students see themselves represented
through an equality impact assessment
— e
 xplicit teaching of personal skills, such
as debate and discussion
— offering an outstanding student
experience that maximises their career
opportunities.

12

SECTION 1: OUR APPROACH TO LEARNING, TEACHING AND ASSESSMENT

Health and Wellbeing
AUB is committed to adopting a wholeuniversity approach to the health and
wellbeing of its staff and students; aims
to become a signatory to the University
Mental Health Charter and actively
promotes good mental health and wellbeing
in everything it does, across the whole of
the university community.
Our courses expressly promote positive
mental health management within their
learning, teaching and assessment
through activities such as:
— clarity of expectations of workload
and pattern across units of study
— clarity of expectations of academic
teaching hours, technical support
and self-directed study hours
— project planning to support management
of student mental health
— reflective student presentations
encouraging good mental health
— adopting structures and processes
which anticipate pinch-points
— avoidance of bunched assessment points.
The mental, emotional, and physical
health of AUB’s community is pivotal not
just for academic and creative excellence,
but for fostering a nurturing and
collaborative environment.
“Academic buoyancy”
Everything we do at AUB shares the simple
aim of supporting our students to achieve;
hopefully to achieve far more than they
thought they were capable.
This does not mean that there will not be
setbacks and challenges to overcome
during their time with us which are typical
of the ups and downs of everyday life
at university and are common to all
students: poor marks; perceived negative
feedback on work from tutors and peers;
dips in motivation; anxiety leading to
procrastination; poor time management
of multiple projects and deadlines; periods
of high stress and times of low confidence.

The University is passionate about working
collaboratively with our students to
help them become more aware of their
thoughts, emotions and behaviours when
they receive disappointing results or
feedback. We also aim to be compassionate
in supporting our students to develop
positive strategies and techniques for
targeting their resilience directly: focusing
on constructive responses to poor
assessment; re-framing frustrations
as learning opportunities; providing
reasons for low marks and supporting
understanding of how to improve and
seeking out further information from tutors
on how to progress.
We will strive to ensure that the inevitable
challenges of study and university life do not
become insurmountable barriers preventing
our students reaching their potential.
Student support
Our academic staff support student
wellbeing through the provision of
pastoral support and guidance.
At AUB, pastoral support means offering a
patient, understanding response to student
concerns or distress, providing empathy,
time, and kindness.
Academic staff will work within their
professional boundaries to help students,
for example:
— advising on academic work and research
— providing guidance on extensions
or mitigation
— referring to other AUB teams who
have the relevant skills and knowledge
to offer specialist support
— facilitating meetings with other
students or staff.

13

SECTION 1: OUR APPROACH TO LEARNING, TEACHING AND ASSESSMENT

It is important that students are supported
by those who are best placed to help them,
and that academic staff maintain their
own wellbeing by not going beyond their
professional competence in supporting
students. Academic staff will signpost
students to the support available in Student
Services if they feel that the student needs
specialist help from staff who are trained and
experienced in providing dedicated support.
Academic staff will seek student consent
before sharing personal, sensitive
information about students. However,
academic staff may discuss concerns about
a student with Student Services teams to
seek advice and guidance, whilst keeping
student details anonymous.

Safeguarding over-rides data protection; if
a member of staff considers there to be an
imminent risk to student safety, information
may be disclosed without consent.
Looking forward
Our students matter, and their future matters.
Through the Learning Teaching and
Assessment Framework, AUB will strive to
make certain that our staff, our knowledge
and skills, our resources, our partnerships,
our courses, our units and our learning,
teaching and assessment thinking and
practices maintain their quality, currency,
relevance, and agility in a world of
unpredictable but accelerating change.

The Regulatory
1
Framework
14

THE AUB LEARNING, TEACHING AND ASSESSMENT FRAMEWORK

02

This framework does not apply to courses delivered in
partnership with CEG. The process for the design, approval,
delivery and monitoring of courses not leading to an award
(such as single blocks of credit, or unaccredited short courses)
are provided in the AUB Quality Assurance Handbook.

1

15

SECTION 2: THE REGULATORY FRAMEWORK

The Regulatory Framework forms Section 2 of the Arts University
Bournemouth Learning Teaching and Assessment Framework
(LTAF). It is intended to be used in alignment with Section 1 of
the LTAF and reflects the aims and objectives set out within
that section; and with Section 3, which provides more detailed
guidance and examples of good practice.
The purpose of the Regulatory Framework is
to set the parameters for course/curriculum
design and delivery at undergraduate and
postgraduate taught levels. It reflects and
aligns to the educational experience which
the University considers most relevant and
appropriate for its taught student body,
and which responds to its vision, values,
and signature pedagogic aspirations.
The University endeavours to take full
advantage of the opportunities presented
by digital technology to support students
from diverse backgrounds. This includes the
delivery of online learning where appropriate,
either of a whole course or as an
augmentation to in-person delivery. All forms
of learning are supported by a wide range
of high-quality asynchronous materials via
the university’s VLE (Canvas) which enable
students to engage at times which are most
suitable for them, while scheduled delivery
sessions can be dedicated to activity which
is best undertaken ‘live’ and / or as an inperson activity.
The precepts in this Regulatory Framework,
and the Roadmap and Guidance document
(LTAF Section 3), apply to all awards and all
forms of delivery, whether in-person or online.

The specific objectives of the Regulatory
Framework are:
— to ensure that all awards offered by
the University are aligned to sectorrecognised standards, appropriate
to level and subject discipline
— to ensure parity and consistency of
the academic experience for all students
studying on courses leading to
qualifications at the same level
— to support the delivery of the
University’s Portfolio Plan
— to encourage curriculum design that values
innovation and enhances the student
experience through collaborative delivery
and complementarity between courses
— to maintain high quality provision, teaching
and learning practices and assessment
methodologies, ensuring these are
inclusive and appropriate to the
subject and level of study.
AUB’s curriculum design will ensure that all
students receive an academic experience
which is contemporary; informed by current
debates in the discipline; prizes innovation; and
prepares them for current and future roles
within the creative industries and beyond.
In consequence, the University has
developed a set of precepts which govern all
higher education awards. These precepts are
set out below. The qualification descriptors
and generic outcomes for each higher
education award are set out in Appendix A.
Appendix B sets out the regulations for the
verification of marks for undergraduate and
postgraduate taught awards.

16

SECTION 2: THE REGULATORY FRAMEWORK

Regulatory Framework
for Undergraduate and
Postgraduate Taught Courses
1. General principles: units, credits and levels
1

The University’s curriculum architecture is based on self-contained blocks
of learning, known as units, each of which has a coherent set of aims and
Learning Outcomes, and associated assessment processes.

2

The outcomes required for each unit are expressed as a series of Learning
Outcomes (LOs). Attainment of these LOs is the objective of the unit;
measuring student attainment is the purpose of the assessment of these
LOs. The detailed expression of unit outcomes as Learning Outcomes, and
how they are assessed, is included within each written unit descriptor and
published for students as accessible documents.

3

Whilst units may be related by sequence or content, each unit is essentially
freestanding and results in the assessment of defined Learning Outcomes
within the period of the unit.

4

Unit descriptors outline all units in a common and consistent manner;
these are considered and approved at validation as part of the course
development process. Unit descriptors provide detail of the level, credit
weighting, aims, Learning Outcomes and assessment components.

5

All units are credit-rated. The University’s Credit Framework is consistent
with typical practice across UK higher education, as set out in the sectorrecognised standards published by the Office for Students2.

6

‘Notional learning hours’ are used to describe the size of a unit and indicate
the length of learning time estimated to be spent, on average, to achieve the
specified Learning Outcomes. In accordance with practice across the UK HE
sector, one credit is allocated for ten notional learning hours. This includes
all the study time for the unit including taught contact hours (lectures,
demonstrations, seminars, tutorials etc), directed study, independent study,
and assessment activity (including preparation).

7

The amount of credit attached to a unit is determined by the size of that
unit, i.e. the amount of time required to complete the necessary learning and
assessment to achieve successful outcomes for the unit. As an example, a
unit worth 20 credits requires a volume of 200 notional study hours.

2

see www.officeforstudents.org.uk/media/53821cbf-5779-4380-bf2a-aa8f5c53ecd4/sector-recognisedstandards.pdf

17

SECTION 2: THE REGULATORY FRAMEWORK

8

A student successfully completing any unit is awarded the full amount of
credit assigned to that unit. The award of credit indicates the achievement
of the threshold standard or better within the unit. All Learning Outcomes
must be passed for an overall pass to be awarded in the unit. There are no
circumstances in which partial credit can be awarded for partial completion
or success in particular components or elements of a unit.

9

Credit is not used for grading but quantifies the volume of learning and is
thus used to determine eligibility for progression or awards. The standard
of achievement is signified through the assessment matrix and grading
descriptors (see the relevant Assessment Regulations for detail).

10

The achievement of credit also facilitates transfer between courses and /
or providers by providing an accessible record of achievement. It permits
transfer across the European Higher Education Area (EHEA), with each credit
worth 0.5 ECTS credits.

11

Once awarded, credit cannot be taken away or withdrawn as it represents
the recognition of achievement. Even if students fail the course for which
they are registered or do not complete it, they retain the credit gained and
may use it as the basis for negotiating future study at the University or
another provider. The only exception to this is where the results of a unit
are amended or annulled following a proven case of academic misconduct,
as described in the relevant assessment regulations.

12

In accordance with the sector-recognised standards, all units are attributed
to a level (L4, L5, L6 or L7). The levels indicate the increasing complexity and
demands of units as studies progress. The University has developed level
descriptors, aligned to the sector-recognised standards, which indicate the
typical requirements of units at each level.

13

Each full level of undergraduate study comprises 120 credits, or 1200
notional learning hours.

14

Level descriptors outline the general characteristics associated with study
at each level and provide a template against which units (or the progression
of units through a level) may be aligned. The key determining factor in ascribing
a level is the complexity of the content and the associated assessment.
Hence, two units which appear similar in content may be at different levels
if the assessment components differ.

15

If a student is admitted with advanced standing, or as a direct entrant to
Level 5 or 6 of an undergraduate course, no credit is awarded against units
or levels of study to which their previous certificated learning or experience
is deemed equivalent, and which they are not required to take. General
credit is awarded at the appropriate level of study.

18

SECTION 2: THE REGULATORY FRAMEWORK

2. General principles: named courses and named awards
16

The standard of an award is safeguarded by regulations which define
requirements for minimum amounts of credit necessary at a given level to
satisfy the requirement for that award. The full list of available awards, and
the associated credit requirements, is given at Appendix A.

17

All approved courses of study will lead to a named award. The naming of
courses is the subject of a separate protocol, available from the Quality
and Standards team.

18

Parentheses may be used to provide an additional focus or specialism
to a more generic award title. The element of the award indicated by the
parentheses may either be delivered through dedicated units / teaching,
or through the particular focus of the work undertaken. For undergraduate
awards, this would normally comprise at least 60 credits at Level 6, and
some study also at Level 5. Admission will be made to the broad course title,
with specialist titles confirmed during Level 5 study, except where there
are strong grounds to the contrary. For postgraduate awards, the
specialism is likely to be delivered through the focus of work and will
be determined before the final 60 credits are commenced.

19

All students will be enrolled against an identified target award. If a student
successfully achieves their target award and has achieved a volume of
credit which would normally allow automatic progression to the next level
of a course, the student can instead decide to progress (and revise their
target award).

20

Subject to certain qualifying conditions, students who do not achieve their
target qualification will normally be offered an intermediate (or “exit”) award,
which reflects the volume and level of credit they have successfully achieved
during their period of study. Students will normally be considered for an
intermediate award if they are withdrawing from the University and have
completed the requisite credit (see the relevant assessment regulations).

21

Courses will be designed in accordance with the general requirements for
credit and will stipulate any additional requirements specific to that course
which students will have to meet to qualify for the award.

22

Courses at both postgraduate and undergraduate level recognise the
quality of student performance by classifying the final outcome. The details
are given in the relevant assessment regulations.

19

SECTION 2: THE REGULATORY FRAMEWORK

3. Admission, registration, progression and award
23

Arts University Bournemouth has established an Admissions Policy, which
is reviewed annually by Academic Board. Minimum entry criteria are included
as an appendix to this policy.

24

All students are registered for the named final award to which their course
of study leads. Students undertaking standalone units will be allocated to
the home course of the unit they are taking.

25

The validation process will give detailed consideration to the proposed
mode(s) of study for any course, with a particular focus on the quality of
the student experience. The addition of further modes of study to an
approved course will be treated as a minor amendment in the first instance
but, if the panel considers that significant issues are raised, this may be
referred to a full validation event. Accelerated study is also permitted for
undergraduate courses (see precept 43 below).

26

The following maximum periods of registration apply:
Master of Architecture: 5 years
Master of Fine Arts: 5 years
Master of Arts: 4 years
Integrated Master’s: 8 years
Honours Degrees: 8 years
Foundation Degrees: 5 years.

27

The minimum period of registration for all undergraduate courses and
awards is one academic year. The minimum period of registration for all
postgraduate courses and awards is one half of the total credit required
for the intended award.

28

The maximum credit awarded through Recognition of Prior Learning (RPL)
towards the fulfilment of an undergraduate award will not normally be more
than two thirds of the total credit required for the award. The maximum
credit awarded through RPL towards the fulfilment of a postgraduate
taught award will not normally be more than one third of the total credit
required for the award.

29

A student may change their mode of study (i.e., full-time or part-time) where
this alternative mode has been validated and is in operation. Students may
also be permitted to study more flexibly, where this meets their needs
and still enables a coherent and rigorous academic learning experience.
Any proposal for a change of mode of study, or for flexible study, must be
approved by the Academic Lead on Standards and Quality or nominee.

30

Students may normally only change between modes of study at the
start of a level, although exceptions may be made where this would be in
the student’s interest. The judgement of the student interest is the sole
responsibility of the Academic Lead on Standards and Quality or nominee.

20

SECTION 2: THE REGULATORY FRAMEWORK

31

For courses of more than 180 credits, there is a formal progression point at
the end of each block of 120 credits. On undergraduate courses, this is the
end of a level of study. Students who have not achieved the full balance of
credit, through either deferral or failure, will normally be required to achieve
this outstanding credit before progressing.

32

Students who have completed a level of study and achieved the full balance
of credit (including any credits achieved by compensation where this is
permitted under the assessment regulations) will progress automatically
to the next level of study.

33

Exceptionally, and at the sole discretion of the Progression and Awards
Board, a student may be permitted to progress conditionally (i.e., with
outstanding units which still must be passed). In such cases, the
Progression and Awards Board will also set the deadline by which any
outstanding assignments must be submitted. If the assignments are
passed, progression is confirmed. If the assignments do not pass, and
no credit is awarded, the progression decision is automatically revoked.
The Progression and Awards Board, or a sub-group of the Board including
at least the Chair, the Chair of the Subject Examination Board and an
independent member appointed by the Academic Lead on Standards
and Quality, confirms the action to be taken (which may be a
requirement for academic intermission or, where the failure
is irretrievable, the termination of studies).

21

SECTION 2: THE REGULATORY FRAMEWORK

4. Curriculum structure
34

The smallest building block within the framework is the standard unit of 20
credits. The regulatory framework does not permit half units, or multiples
involving half units.

35

The largest unit permitted within the framework is normally 60 credits
(which may be one unit at Level 6 only). Exceptionally one 80-credit unit at
Level 6 or Level 7 may be approved where this is part of a “closed course”
designed specifically to respond to an external demand (for instance, as a
dedicated course of study for an employer, or a defined group of overseas
students). In consequence, an 80-credit unit is not available for a typical
course. At Level 4 and Level 5, the maximum unit size is 40 credits. There are
no restrictions on the number of 40 credit units that may be used at any
level; the overall course structure will be considered and approved through
validation and review.

36

There is no standard unit structure; course teams will determine the
most appropriate structure to support student progression through
the design of the course curriculum. This is likely to see a progressive
reduction in the amount of contact time at each level, as students take
greater responsibility for their projects through independent learning.
The breakdown of study hours for each unit, including scheduled taught
activity and independent study, will be communicated in advance via unit
descriptors, timetable, and the project scheme of work.

37

The expectation is that each student will receive the following number of
taught contact hours per unit:
Level

20 credits

40 credits

60 credits

Total contact
for the level

4

50 hrs

100 hrs

-

300 hrs

5

50 hrs

100 hrs

-

300 hrs

6

40 hrs

70 hrs

90 hrs

200-220 hrs

7

20 hrs

40 hrs

60 hrs

180 hrs

Taught student contact hours might vary per week/per term in accordance
with the subject type, and course, or unit content. There may be variation
to these totals within a level of study, such that student contact hours are
lower in one unit but correspondingly higher in another unit. Overall student
contact hours should match the expected total for the level.

38

AUB courses are structured in such a way as to ensure an equitable workload
across the taught academic year. Similarly, courses are structured to ensure
that student learning is progressive, and early units or levels are used, in part,
to prepare students for the demands of the later study requirements.

22

SECTION 2: THE REGULATORY FRAMEWORK

39

Courses may offer Pathway options to allow students to specialise in a
specific area of interest, and for these courses, students will take the units
assigned to their chosen Pathway. Pathway options represent different
routes through the course from a single named admission point, with
shared delivery where this is appropriate. Precept 18 above provides details
of the credit and naming arrangements for such awards, which must be
approved at validation or periodic review. Where a course offers a Pathway,
the list of students who are intending to complete a named award must be
presented to Registry by mid-point of the final year of study.

40

Courses may offer a limited amount of choice, either through offering
optional units (which are alternate but course-specific units, available at
any level), or through offering elective units (which may include units from
other disciplines). The range of optional and/or elective units available will be
considered and approved at validation or periodic review.

41

Student choice can also be offered through a Learning Agreement. This
is common on project units, where the student may have considerable
flexibility in how they meet the unit Learning Outcomes. The Learning
Agreement offers the student the opportunity to write their own brief and
will set out the proposed activities and deliverables (ie what the student
will submit for assessment), explaining how these meet the unit Learning
Outcomes. The Learning Agreement must be approved by the Unit Leader.

23

SECTION 2: THE REGULATORY FRAMEWORK

5. Study time
42

For Master of Arts awards, there are three phases of study, each of
fifteen weeks. Subject to cohort viability, there are two entry points
in each academic year.

43

For all other taught courses, including the Master of Architecture and all
undergraduate awards, teaching is delivered over three terms, each of
ten weeks, totalling 30 weeks. Thus, the taught year will normally equate
to one academic level. Courses may be designed for delivery using a fourth
term (during the summer period), providing accelerated learning, where this
meets applicant demand and where delivery can be managed. The formally
agreed terms of study include the full student learning experience, including
assessment, tutorials and academic counselling.

44

For part-time awards, or for students who are following a more flexible route,
the taught year may not equate to an academic level. Progression between
levels will be determined at the end of each level, which will always be at the
end of a term.

45

Teaching and the submission of assessment tasks will fall within the
specified taught time, although students who have not completed the full
balance of credit during the scheduled teaching time may be required to
retrieve outstanding units during untaught time.

46

Educational visits are permitted where they take place during the agreed
weeks of study and are arranged in accordance with the Educational Visits
Procedure. Arrangements for educational visits, work placement and other
activity off campus must permit other units normally taught at that time to
be studied appropriately.

47

Student Exchange is permitted, in accordance with the University’s
Student Exchange Policy. The way in which the outcomes of the Exchange
will be assessed, and will contribute to the student’s overall academic
profile, must be agreed through a dedicated Learning Agreement in
advance of the Exchange taking place.

48

Undergraduate courses include the option for students to undertake a
placement year, unless it is exceptionally agreed through validation that
this option should not be available for a specific course. The placement
year must be completed satisfactorily but is not formally assessed and
does not attract credit, although it will be mentioned on the graduation
certificate and student transcript.

24

SECTION 2: THE REGULATORY FRAMEWORK

49

Courses may also offer shorter periods of placement activity as part of
a taught unit. Some courses may include an accredited placement unit as
part of the curriculum design. On other courses, a student may undertake
a period of placement learning as part of a Learning Agreement. All work
placement activities must be approved by the Course Leader as providing
relevant knowledge or experience to support the student’s overall learning
on the course and subsequent employment upon graduation.

50

The normal expectation is that any shorter periods of work experience
activity should take place within the scheduled weeks of study (term-time),
except where explicitly approved by LTQ. LTQ may agree that placement
activity can be undertaken during vacation periods where necessary, but
the total study time should be no more than the standard agreed number
of teaching weeks. Periods of work placement activity must be arranged in
accordance with the Work Placement and Release Policy.

51

The University may offer a reading week for Higher Education students,
but this will not count as one of the agreed weeks of study. Individual
courses may include a teaching-free week as part of the agreed weeks
of study where this is appropriate.

6. Curriculum design and content
52

Curriculum content is determined by the course proposer and developer
within the parameters set out by LTQ, the LTAF and subject to approval from
the validation panel. The content for any named award will be such that
graduates will develop comprehensive, practical and theoretical knowledge
and understanding of their discipline, informed by current debates within that
discipline, with the ability to position their work within relevant professional
and graduate level work-related contexts.

53

The choice and design of content, and the associated assessment, will be
informed by the need to ensure that all students are required to deploy
the core techniques of analysis and enquiry within their discipline.

54

Courses are encouraged to deploy a variety of delivery methods, as
appropriate to the course content and the anticipated learning.
A taxonomy of delivery methods is provided in Section 3 of the LTAF.

25

SECTION 2: THE REGULATORY FRAMEWORK

55

While decisions about curriculum design and content are the responsibility
of the academic course team, subject to precept 52 above, LTQ has agreed
the following specific requirements for all awards:
i) All undergraduate courses include a major project component during the
final level of study, which enables students to complete a significant body
of work. This major project must comprise a minimum of 40 credits.
ii) All undergraduate students will normally be expected to produce a piece of
academic writing of at least 5,000 words as part of their assessed work in
the final year of study. This may be a traditional academic essay, but could
also be a fully referenced research proposal, industry report or similar.
iii) For all postgraduate awards, the final phase of study will typically comprise
a 60-credit project unit which enables students to demonstrate the scope
and depth of learning required of an award at this level. No Master’s award will
be approved which does not include a major project of at least 40 credits.
These elements may not be replaced by a period of work experience, RPL
or any other activity. However, precepts 73 and 74 on alternative forms of
assessment continue to apply.

56

All courses provide opportunities for students to reflect on their learning.
Critical reflection and self-evaluation will often form part of one component
of assessment, especially in self-directed project units working to a
Learning Agreement.

57

All courses may include a period of work placement (up to a maximum of one
year). All Foundation Degree courses will include a period of work placement,
as required by the QAA Foundation Degree Characteristics Statement.

58

In addition, courses are designed to deliver the core graduate attributes
of creativity, excellence, relevance and impact. Typical outcomes
associated with these attributes are included in Part 3 of the LTAF.

59

Many of these core graduate attributes are not assessed independently
but are behaviours and competences that are required to fulfil course
outcomes. For example, organisation and time management skills might be
tested through the overall success of a student in planning and delivering a
major project. Other attributes might be assessed as a specific unit learning
outcome, or through the totality of the student experience on the course.

60

There is no common shape to the delivery of these skills across AUB awards.
However, there is an expectation that all students at Level 4 will be
introduced to academic conventions and good academic practice (such
as the avoidance of plagiarism); information and digital literacy; and general
skills which facilitate academic study within higher education.

26

SECTION 2: THE REGULATORY FRAMEWORK

7. Assessment and feedback
61

Assessment is an integral part of learning. All assessment tasks are
designed to support the learning process, embedding knowledge and
skills, and to prepare students for success in future (both academically
and professionally).

62

The specified assessment components enable students to demonstrate
their achievement of the Learning Outcomes for each unit. The method of
assessment must be relevant to the Learning Outcomes and enables a
reliable and accurate evaluation of student achievement of those outcomes.

63

In addition, assessment supports students in demonstrating their
achievement of the knowledge, skills and aptitudes they will need in their
future academic and professional life. This includes the graduate outcomes
set out in the University’s Graduate Futures Framework.

64

The process of assessment is designed to enable students to apply their
learning in diverse contexts, to reflect on their practice, and to develop their
unique professional identity.

65

Each assessment method used by the course is explained to students
so that expectations are clear. A taxonomy of assessment methods is
provided in Section 3 of the Learning, Teaching and Assessment Framework.

66

It must be made clear to students what they are expected to achieve.
Where students are required to complete a Learning Agreement (see
precept 41 above), this is discussed in detail before approval, with a
clear statement of expectations and how each learning outcome will
be demonstrated. If students are required to work as part of a group to
complete a task, it is clear to everyone how their contribution will be judged.

67

Assessment tasks are designed to promote academic integrity and ethical
behaviour. While the risk of academic misconduct cannot be eliminated,
tasks are designed which minimise this risk and encourage student
engagement. The design of both Learning Outcomes and assessment
tasks enable students to evidence their own achievement.

68

The volume of assessment must be proportionate to the size of the unit.
The validation process will ensure that all assessment components make
a valid contribution to the demonstration of Learning Outcomes, and do
not place an unreasonable burden on the student. Where two or more
summative assessment components are used, a percentage weighting must
be given to each. All assessment components should be explicitly defined
in a written brief, except where a learning agreement is developed to define
individual study within the parameters of a unit.

27

SECTION 2: THE REGULATORY FRAMEWORK

69

If formative assessment tasks are introduced (ie tasks which are primarily
diagnostic and do not contribute to the overall mark for the unit), they must
be clearly listed, and the contribution to the student learning experience
must be explicit.

70

Any grouping of assessable activities into one “portfolio” assessment
component must specifically identify the required elements and should
reflect an appropriate level of complexity and scale commensurate with
the credit weighting of the unit. A maximum number of pieces to be
submitted should be identified within the unit descriptor, with a minimum
also given where this is essential to demonstrate breadth as well as depth
of learning. The overall assessment component must be a coherent,
integrated submission, and the portfolio must respond to one brief,
even where this may have more than one required element.

71

Word counts for written assessments (essays, reports and analysis)
will typically be as follows:
L4 2,500 (20 credits); 5,000 (40 credits)
L5 3,500 (20 credits); 6,000-7,500 (40 credits)
L6 5,000 (20 credits); 8,000-10,000 (40 credits)
L7 5,000 (20 credits); 8,000-10,000 (40 credits); 9,000-11,000 (60 credits)
Reflective commentary: 1,000
If a written piece forms only part of the assessment, the expected
wordcount should be proportionate: hence if a written piece comprises
50% of the assessment, the wordcount should be 50% of the expected
volume where it is the sole piece of assessment.
All word counts should be considered as a norm, with a margin of +/- 10%

72

All assessment is subject to moderation under the terms of the
AUB Verification Policy.

73

Wherever possible, assessment methods should be flexible to encourage
achievement by students with a variety of strengths and learning styles.
This may include alternative forms of submission within one unit, each
meeting the specified Learning Outcomes, or may be delivered through
the range of methods used across units. The full diet of assessment
enables students to evidence their intellectual, practical and transferable
skills, and prepares them for further study or professional progression.

74

All forms of submission may be replaced by a suitable alternative form,
where it can be demonstrated that this also meets the stated Learning
Outcomes and where the student learning experience, and assessment,
is equivalent. The Course Leader is responsible for ensuring equivalence,
in consultation with the Chair of the Examination Board.

28

SECTION 2: THE REGULATORY FRAMEWORK

75

The assessment matrix indicates how a student's work will be judged
in relation to the Learning Outcomes. There should also be a clear
indication of the level required to pass and the requirements to
pass at each grade of assessment.

76

Students are assessed on how well they have met the Learning Outcomes
of a unit, and therefore, the assessment matrix must be designed to assess
these and to what level of success the student has achieved them.

77

All AUB course units will be assessed using an assessment matrix
specifically designed to assess the Learning Outcomes of individual units.
This ensures that students have the greatest level of clarity possible when
receiving feedback and grades for units.

78

AUB strongly values the process of providing personalised feedback to all
students, therefore the use of an assessment matrix does not negate the
requirement to provide individual written feedback to students.

79

Feedback and feedforward can be provided to students via formal and
informal methods. It could be delivered in a face-to-face setting on
campus, or could be in writing, or in some cases, in video or audio format.
Conversations that take place during tutorials, crits and studio practice
sessions could also be considered as formative feedback. More detailed
guidance about feedback is provided in Section 3 of the LTAF, including
indicative wordcounts for summative feedback.

80

Feedback should be constructive and contribute to the student’s learning
and development. Summative feedback will reference performance against
the Learning Outcomes and substantiate the mark awarded. Feedback
will normally be returned to students within four working weeks of the
submission date.

29

SECTION 2: THE REGULATORY FRAMEWORK

8. Recording progress
81

Students are entitled to regular information about their progress
throughout the course. Each student is entitled to a minimum of one
academic guidance tutorial in each taught term. This forms part of
the formal taught contact time for the relevant unit of study.

82

Each course is allocated to a Subject Examination Board which ratifies
the results of units owned by all relevant courses (undergraduate or
postgraduate), following internal and external verification as appropriate.
The terms of reference and constitution of the Subject Examination
Boards are detailed in the assessment regulations. Subject Examination
Boards may, at their discretion, arrange for additional meetings during
the year to consider the outcomes for part-time courses at points of
progression between levels; or to consider the results of work submitted
for reassessment.

83

The University’s Progression and Awards Board will meet as required to
reach decisions about progression and award for all students registered
on AUB awards. The Progression and Awards Board ensures the consistent
application of the University’s assessment regulations across all awards.
Where relevant, it will also consider the recommendations of Subject
Examination Boards on intermission and retrieval. The terms of reference
and constitution of the Progression and Awards Board are detailed in the
assessment regulations.

84

A transcript recording individual achievement will be made available by
Registry to the student at the end of each level of study. This will be a
means by which students can monitor, build upon, and reflect on their
personal development and career planning. The transcript conforms to
the European Diploma Supplement Requirements.

30

SECTION 2: THE REGULATORY FRAMEWORK

9. Managing delivery
85

Whilst units have a volume defined by the time required to achieve their
stated Learning Outcomes, they have no intrinsic ‘shape’. The pattern of
study is specified only by points at which teaching is delivered and periods
when access to facilities occur within the overall duration of the unit. The use
of independent study time, which tends to increase throughout the course,
is flexible (when not strictly related to the provision of technical resources).

86

Academic courses may be constructed as a series of intensive study
blocks, a group of longer concurrent units, or a combination of both.

87

Graduating students are requested to remain in attendance until the
meeting of the relevant Examination Board so that they can meet the
external examiner if requested, but this is not a formal requirement.

88

The academic calendar for each academic year will specify the deadline
for all work to have been submitted for assessment, and a further deadline
for marks to be notified to Registry. The results of earlier units should be
notified on their completion. Students will be informed of the latest possible
date to receive written feedback and grades for their work, this will be
published within their project briefs and communicated in the appropriate
place on the Canvas VLE.

10. Quality assurance and enhancement
89

Academic Board will establish and may amend from time to time the
academic structures required to underpin the University Regulatory
Framework. Operational responsibility for the Framework is devolved
to Learning, Teaching and Quality Committee (LTQ).

90

LTQ has delegated responsibility, on behalf of Academic Board, for
the arrangements for the quality assurance and enhancement of
the University’s academic provision.

91

Processes for quality assurance and enhancement are themselves
subject to regular review by the Committee and are detailed in the
HE Quality Assurance Handbook, which is published annually
and available on the Intranet.

32

SECTION 2: THE REGULATORY FRAMEWORK

Appendix A: Awards Available
The following awards are available at undergraduate
and postgraduate taught level (Levels 4-7)
(In each case the italics show where the course title is included; this is given in plain type
on all certificates and associated documentation)
Master of Architecture

MArch Architecture

Level 7

Master of Fine Art

MFA Subject

Level 7

Master of Arts
Master of Science

MA Subject
MSc Subject

Level 7

Master of Arts with specialism
Master of Science with specialism

MA Subject (Specialism)
MSc Subject (Specialism)

Level 7

Master of Research

MRes

Level 7

Postgraduate Diploma

PGDip Subject

Level 7

Postgraduate Certificate

PGCert Subject

Level 7

Integrated Master’s

MArt Subject

Level 7

Honours Degree

BA (Hons) Subject
BSc (Hons) Subject

Level 6

Honours Degree with specialism

BA (Hons) Subject (Specialism)
BSc (Hons) Subject (Specialism)

Level 6

Degree (without Honours)

BA Subject
BSc Subject

Level 6

Foundation Degree

FdA Subject

Level 5

Diploma of Higher Education

DipHE Subject

Level 5

Certificate of Higher Education

CertHE Subject

Level 4

The following credit requirements apply:
For the award of a Master of Architecture (MArch), a minimum of 240 credits must be
gained, of which a minimum of 180 credits must be at Level 7. An MA will be awarded to any
student undertaking an award leading to 240 credits, who leaves their course of study having
successfully completed 180 credits.

33

SECTION 2: THE REGULATORY FRAMEWORK

For the award of a Master of Fine Art (MFA), a minimum of 240 credits must be gained, of which
a minimum of 180 credits must be at Level 7. An MA will be awarded to any student undertaking
an award leading to 240 credits, who leaves their course of study having successfully
completed 180 credits.
For a Master’s Degree, a minimum of 180 credits must be gained, of which a minimum of
120 credits must be at Level 7.
For a Postgraduate Diploma, a minimum of 120 credits must be gained at Level 7. A PGDip
will be awarded to any student who leaves their course of study having successfully
completed 120 credits at Level 7. Any credit undertaken at Level 6, as part of an agreed
postgraduate taught programme, cannot contribute to the credit required for a PGDip.
For a Postgraduate Certificate, a minimum of 60 credits must be gained at Level 7.
A PGCert will be awarded to any student who leaves their course of study having
successfully completed 60 credits at Level 7. Any credit undertaken at Level 6, as
part of an agreed postgraduate taught programme, cannot contribute to the credit
required for a PGCert.
For an Integrated Master’s award, a minimum of 480 credits must be gained of which a
minimum of 120 credits must be at Level 7; a minimum of 120 credits must be at Level 6;
and a minimum of 240 credits must be at Level 5 or above.
For an Honours Degree, a minimum of 360 credits must be gained of which a minimum of 240
credits must be at Level 5 or above. Of these credits, a minimum of 120 must be at Level 6.
For students who articulate from a Foundation Degree to an Honours Degree, a minimum
of 120 credits at Level 6 must be gained to achieve the Honours Degree.
For a Degree without Honours, a minimum of 300 credits must be achieved, of which a minimum
of 60 credits must be at Level 6, and a minimum of 180 credits must be at Level 5 or above.
For a Foundation Degree, a minimum of 240 credits must be gained, of which a minimum
of 120 credits must be at Level 5.
For a Diploma of Higher Education, a minimum of 240 credits must be gained, of which a
minimum of 120 credits must be at Level 5.
For a Certificate of Higher Education, a minimum of 120 credits must be gained.

AUB Roadmap
and Guidance
34

THE
THE
AUB
AUB
LEARNING,
LEARNING,
TEACHING
TEACHING
AND
AND
ASSESSMENT
ASSESSMENT
FRAMEWORK
FRAMEWORK

03

35

SECTION 3: AUB ROADMAP AND GUIDANCE

This section sets out detailed guidance and good practice for
the design and delivery of courses, and for assessment and
feedback. It applies to both online and in-person activity. AUB
has published a separate Digital Learning Framework which
provides more detailed guidance about developing online
learning and assessment.
The Roadmap and Guidance applies to all AUB taught courses
at undergraduate and postgraduate taught level (Levels 4-7).
It provides an ongoing source of good practice and should be used
by academics, course developers and course teams approaching
periodic review. This section of the LTAF will be updated regularly so
that it remains current and responds to developments introduced
by the portfolio plan and new curriculum developments.

Constructing courses
Course Overview
The best way to construct a course is to start with one or two sentences which summarise
the “tagline” for the course – what’s it about, why would someone take it? This tagline will be
based on the working course title which was used for outline approval (Stages 1 and 2); the
title can always be amended through the development process so concentrate on what you
consider to be the fundamentals of the course.
Course Outcomes
From the tagline, the course outcomes should be identified, probably no more than 6-8.
Learning Outcomes, whether at course or unit level, are an expression of the knowledge,
skills and abilities a student should possess and be able to demonstrate by the end of the
course or unit.
For Honours degree courses, these should be aligned to the core graduate outcomes
for all Level 6 awards in the UK, expressed at AUB as:
graduates will be able to evidence comprehensive, practical and theoretical
“ Allknowledge
and understanding of their discipline within relevant contexts. This core
knowledge will be informed by current debates within the discipline, and all graduates
will demonstrate their understanding of these debates and their implications and will
be able to deploy the core techniques of analysis and enquiry within this discipline.

”

For Master’s degree courses, the Learning Outcomes should be aligned to the Master’s
degree qualification descriptor, which must be met in full for a student to be awarded a
Master’s degree.
Course outcome could start with: “by the end of this course, a graduate will know / be able to…”
It is also recommended to refer to the generic Level 6 outcomes derived from the AUB
Graduate Futures Framework, which are mapped against the national expectations developed
by QAA in partnership with the sector and adopted by OfS. This will ensure that course
outcomes are at the right level and meet national expectations.

36

SECTION 3: AUB ROADMAP AND GUIDANCE

Level Outcomes
Once course outcomes have been defined, the next step would be to reflect and consider
how these will be learned: not how they will be taught, but what a student will need to do
to master those course outcomes and to be able to demonstrate them reliably.
This should help with the development of outcomes for Level 6. It will then be necessary
to consider how to bring students from Level 4 to the expected achievement at Level 6.
What should they be demonstrating by the end of Level 4, and by the end of Level 5?
Academic judgement should be used to define, and design, the learning journey.
It is important to remember that learning is not linear or atomised; students may develop
an understanding of a particular concept or technique across several units or might find
that something suddenly becomes clear later in the learning journey. Reinforcement of
learning in subsequent units, even indirectly, is a valuable part of curriculum design. Equally,
not all outcomes may be directly assessed; for example, excellent organisation and time
management will be required to resolve any major project of 40 credits or more; a student
who manages their time well is likely to produce a better and more complete response to
a brief than a student who manages their time badly.
The concept of the ‘learning journey’ may not be familiar, but recently researchers have started
to refer to this as ‘storyboarding’ the educational experience. They recommend using a blank
wall with a lot of post-it notes, or an online collaborative platform. The learning journey is simply
a way of setting out how the learning experience will unfold across one, two or three years,
with key points marked out. Once the likely knowledge and skills at admission are considered,
and the endpoint is clear, there are any number of ways to bring the student from ‘point A’
to ‘point B’; and the way identified is the student learning journey. On each course, a student
works through a thoughtfully structured unit or units, and then onto the next unit, taking with
them the knowledge, skills and abilities they have developed. As units are self-contained blocks
of learning, it is possible to perform well in later units even if some earlier units have not been
passed, but those earlier units should help to prepare them for what comes next.
Constructing Units
Once learning design and learning journey has been determined, the Learning Outcomes
for individual units can be drafted, with relevant expectations at each level and building
progressively. It is important to start by thinking about the student academic experience as
a whole, especially if units are going to run sequentially, one in each term, because each new
unit will be starting from the point the previous unit finished.
In a sense, even though they are written in a student-centred way, the aims of the unit are
for the staff: what is it that the course team want to achieve through this unit? The Learning
Outcomes are about what the student is expected to be able to do, and demonstrate, by the
end of the unit (and, therefore, set out the student’s starting point for the next unit). It may be
easiest to write the unit description after you have drafted the aims and Learning Outcomes,
but these parts need to be consistent and mutually reinforcing: together, they explain the
purpose of the unit within the course.
In identifying teaching content and relevant supporting materials (resources or reference
lists), it is important to consider how units might work together – especially if they are running
concurrently. The outline syllabus is indicative; it is not expected to give a week-by-week
guide, and it may be that additional material is covered especially if it is particularly topical,
but it must include any areas on which a student will be assessed. As an example, if students
are required to undertake collaborative work for assessment, the syllabus should include an
induction to group working.

37

SECTION 3: AUB ROADMAP AND GUIDANCE

When considering learning and teaching methods, it is essential to start from learning: what
is the student expected to learn and to demonstrate, and what is the best way of enabling
them to achieve this? For example, the provision of some asynchronous materials could be
an important part of a student’s journey, as it gives them the chance to take responsibility for
their learning and to go back over materials later if they need to. The unit descriptor will require
a breakdown of the time to be dedicated to different types of delivery, and to independent
study, for each unit.
It is important to ensure that sufficient account has been taken, throughout all teaching
and learning practices, of core AUB values and principles (outlined in LTAF Section 1). This
includes making sure that core expectations are built into Learning Outcomes, to be sure
that all students have taken account of them. AUB taught units will normally have 4 Learning
Outcomes at Levels 4 and 5; and 4-6 at Levels 6 and 7.
Writing a Unit Descriptor
Unit descriptors might have many different audiences, as the same document can be used
for various purposes. However, the primary audience is the student: the unit descriptor
explains what the unit is about, how it will be taught, what a student is expected to be able
to do at its conclusion, and how this will be assessed. It is the summary of the intentions,
expectations and taught content for the unit and together, the unit descriptors provide a clear
view of the curriculum journey a student will travel while studying a course.
All taught content, Learning Outcomes and taught content should be led by the unit descriptor
which acts as a ‘master’ document for how all units within a course should be delivered.
Examples of Unit Learning Outcomes
It is not intended that these examples of Learning Outcomes will be used within any course
or unit design; they are provided for illustrative purposes and to give guidance on the
appropriateness of level and language.
Level 4
— Apply critical thinking skills to analyse
and evaluate design concepts and their
effectiveness in different contexts.

Level 6
— Apply independent judgement in defining
and researching a relevant topic in the
field of the creative and cultural industries.

— Employ effective collaboration methods
with appropriate internal and external
partners and stakeholders.

— Build a solid evidence base by using
appropriate primary and secondary
research methodologies.

— Analyse the outcomes/impacts of a project.

— Develop a plan to deliver an innovative
product, concept, event, or service
which is realistic, viable and realisable.

Level 5
— Produce an exhibition layout and
design concept proposition that clearly
communicates the audience experience.
— Communicate clearly brand values and how
they relate to the intended target market.
— Formulate a comprehensive design brief,
demonstrating an understanding of key
components required for a design project.

Level 7
— Identify the relevant techniques, skills
and mediums required of a professional
creative practitioner.
— Publish/produce a confident, coherent
finished outcome that communicates
a message and considers the end
user context.
— Research a target audience in relation
to a political or cultural message.

38

SECTION 3: AUB ROADMAP AND GUIDANCE

Delivery
Taught Delivery Approach
The taught delivery approaches at AUB are both teacher-centred and student-centred.
These two approaches impact the student learning experience, as well as their
ability to understand new concepts and take in new knowledge.
Teacher centred learning involves the delivery or presentation of information
content from the academic to the student.
Student centred learning involves the active participation of the student
under the supervision of the academic or technical staff.
Students are also encouraged and expected to adopt independent learning
capabilities to the appropriate level of HE studies.

Taxonomy of Taught Delivery Types
The following activities are considered formal contact time.

Taught Delivery Type

Description

Lecture
(All students studying a unit)

Academic member of staff, or guest speaker,
delivers information via a presentation to a cohort.

Briefing
(All students studying a unit)

Academic member of staff (preferably the unit
leader) delivers unit introduction information via
a presentation to a cohort. Would usually
include as a minimum, but is not limited to:
— unit briefing (introduction or other)
— unit assessment criteria
— unit schedule / scheme of work
— assessment requirements and submission deadlines
— assessment feedback deadlines
— assessed presentation dates

Induction
(group size will vary)

An induction into resource, specialist equipment
or processes, specialist software induction.

Seminar Activity
(Indicative group size of 20)

A group session that would usually relate to a lecture
topic or subject related topic aligned to the Learning
Outcomes and assessment requirements of the unit.
— Seminar (group discussion of a topic)
— Critique (peer and/or staff
feedback on work in progress)
— Peer Review (students discuss or
feedback on each other’s work)

39

SECTION 3: AUB ROADMAP AND GUIDANCE

Assessment Presentations
(Students involved in the presentations)

Students in a group or individually present their
work to an audience or panel for assessment.
— formative
— assessed

Tutorials
(individual)

Engagement of staff with students individually
to discuss their work or progress with learning
or achievement of assessment tasks.
— progress tutorial (scheduled)
— progress tutorial (sign-up)

Tutorials
(group)

Engagement of staff with students in a group
to discuss their work or progress with learning
or achievement of assessment tasks.
— progress tutorial (scheduled)
— progress tutorial (sign-up)

Workshop
(Indicative group size of 20, apart from if
a space does not allow this number)

Interactive learning session that
might consist of, but is not limited to:
— drawing (open)
— life drawing / painting / making
— digital / practical induction
— digital / practical training
— analogue induction
— mock interviews

Screening
(Group size will vary)

Showing of film(s) for education purposes.
Students must be provided with information
regarding why they are watching the film(s)
and what the associated tasks, activities
or outcomes are following the screening.

Educational Visit
(Group size will vary)

A supervised trip organised for students off
campus to a destination, organisation or
business relevant to their learning for the unit.

Studio Practice
(Group size will vary)

Students will be working in a space with guided
learning, led by staff. Students are expected to
be in the studio as part of unit delivery contact time.

40

SECTION 3: AUB ROADMAP AND GUIDANCE

Open Studio with Support
(Group size will vary)

Opportunity for students to use studio space in their
own time with academic or technician demonstrator
support available. These sessions count as formal
taught contact time.

Indicative group sizes are provided for some delivery types. There will be occasions when
smaller numbers are required (based on the size of the cohort, or the size of the space /
health and safety restrictions). Similarly, there may be occasions where much larger groups
sizes are acceptable, especially where the activity takes place online or using digital tools.
Staff are expected to exercise their judgement in determining the most appropriate group size
(using these indicative figures as a guide) while prioritising the student learning experience.
The following activities are also typical on many courses, but do NOT constitute formal
contact hours:

Open Studio with Supervisory Presence

Opportunity for students to use studio
space in their own time. Supervisory
support is provided due to health
and safety considerations.

Open Studio without Support

Opportunity for students to use
studio space in their own time.
No staff support available.

Contact Hours
AUB considers contact hours to be the hours that students spend in contact with teaching
staff for the purposes of learning, teaching, and assessment; undertaken online or in person.
Contact hours are the taught contact hours to which each student has a right and include
all taught sessions as described within the taxonomy of taught delivery types; it also
includes sessions delivered by other staff (eg; Library staff, careers staff etc).
In Section 2 of the LTAF (Precept 37), AUB sets typical expectations for the number
of taught contact hours that each student will receive per unit.
These are repeated below:

Level

20 credits

40 credits

60 credits

Total contact
for the level

4

50 hrs

100 hrs

-

300 hrs

5

50 hrs

100 hrs

-

300 hrs

6

40 hrs

70 hrs

90 hrs

200-210 hrs

7

20 hrs

40 hrs

60 hrs

180 hrs

41

SECTION 3: AUB ROADMAP AND GUIDANCE

The following are provided as examples of how this works in practice:
— A student who is on an educational visit for 8 hours is receiving 8 hours of contact.
— Sessions such as sign-up tutorials, where a student has a right to a tutorial, are
contact hours (even if some students choose not to take up this option). However,
contact hours relate only to the time received by each individual student: if sign-up
tutorials are scheduled for six hours, with each tutorial lasting 20 minutes, the
student contact time is 20 minutes.
Whether the student is in a group or individual session, the actual length of the tutorial
iswhat is regarded as contact time for the individual student.
Taught contact hours will vary per week/per term in accordance with the subject type,
and/or unit content. For example, in a 40-credit unit at Level 4, the expectation is that
each student will receive 100 contact hours, which equates to an average of ten hours of
contact time per week throughout the term. However, it may be that there are more contact
hours towards the beginning of a unit, with this reducing closer to the assessment point as
students spend more time on independent learning.
There might be variation of contact hours per unit within a level of study, such that contact
is lower in one unit but correspondingly higher in another. However, it is expected that
student contact hours should match the expected total for the level.
Some assessment, such as assessed presentations, will constitute contact hours.
Feedback tutorials also form part of student contact hours.

42

SECTION 3: AUB ROADMAP AND GUIDANCE

Assessment
Types of Assessment
Assessment at AUB consists of two types:
Formative Assessment:
— used during the learning process to assess student progress and understanding
— provides feedback on learning-in-process, allowing for development and enhanced progress
— feedback would usually be dialogue-based and ungraded, written, recorded or overall
group feedback might also be provided
— feedback should be aligned to unit Learning Outcomes.
Summative Assessment:
— used at the end of the learning process to assess student outcomes
— evaluates student learning against unit Learning Outcomes
— graded using an assessment criterion aligned to the unit Learning Outcomes
(provided to students during the introduction to the unit).

Taxonomy of Assessment Methods
Assessment Method Description
Essay

An academic written piece of work (may also contain visuals)
that includes but may not always be limited to:
— responds to a question or approaches a subject
from an informed individual perspective
— is based on academic research
— presents arguments, showing subject and critical awareness
— demonstrates academic methodology, utilising aims, objectives
and academic referencing in line with AUB requirements.
Word counts must be provided via the unit brief for all essays,
whether these are to be assessed formatively or summatively.
Word count guidance is provided in Precept 37 of LTAF Section 2.

Industry report

An industry report provides an overview of a specific industry.
Often including, but not limited to:
— industry trends and outlooks
— industry performance, and forecasts
— market intelligence (business and consumer)
— primary and / or secondary research
— focus on relevant major industries (country specific or global)
Word counts must be provided via the unit brief for all industry
reports, whether these are to be assessed formatively or
summatively. Word count guidance is provided in Precept
37 of LTAF Section 2.

43

SECTION 3: AUB ROADMAP AND GUIDANCE

Presentation / Group
Presentation / Pitch

A presentation would require a student, or a group of
students, to formally present information to an audience or
panel; this could be in person or via a video recording. The
presentation or pitch would usually present a new product,
idea, business, or piece of work.
The length of time required for the presentation must be
provided for all types of presentation whether individual
or group, in person or recorded, via the unit brief. The length
of time should proportionate to the level of study and
credit weighting of the assessment element.

Portfolio of Work /
E-Portfolio of Work

— A portfolio provides a compilation of academic,
professional, developmental, or creative materials that
demonstrate a students’ skills, creativity, knowledge,
and experience in response to a brief.
— The portfolio could be hard copy or digital. (Ensure
student inclusivity is considered.)
— The amount of work required for the portfolio must be
specified via the unit brief, for example: 10 pages of
research / 10 pages of development work / 10 pages
of process work and/or 5 pages of final creative work.

Research File

A research file would contain work that demonstrates
diligent, focused and considered research. This might
include, but is not limited to:
— evidence of visual or written inquiry or examination of
a subject, artist, designer, creative approach, era, artistic
style, or industry
— investigation or experimentation intended to assist
with the discovery and interpretation of facts
— creative or written exploration of theory or practice
— practical investigation of new or revised theory or practice
— the collecting of a range of information about a particular
subject (appropriate to the level and area of study)
— audience, industry, business, creative or design
investigations and visual reference points
The amount of work required for the research file must be
specified. The amount of written or creative work should
be clearly communicated via the unit brief.

44

SECTION 3: AUB ROADMAP AND GUIDANCE

Creative Artefact

A creative artefact provides the opportunity for some level
of interpretation.
This assessment method allows for different options
for creative assessed outcomes to be implemented
for unit briefs when working on live projects, competitions
and industry opportunities as they arise, (provided
they afford students the opportunity to fulfil the unit
Learning Outcomes.)
A creative artefact may form part of a Portfolio / E-Portfolio
of work and must be aligned with the Learning Outcomes
for the unit. The requirements for assessment must also
be clear within the assessment matrix provided during the
unit introduction briefing and via the unit brief.
A clear description of the expected creative artefact must
be provided via the unit brief to ensure what is required is
understood and may also include text submissions such
as prose or poetry.
A clear description of the expected creative artefact must
be provided via the unit brief along with expected amount
of work required, for example, 6 x portrait photographs.

Written Artefact

A written artefact provides the opportunity for some level
of interpretation.
This assessment method allows for different options
for written assessed outcomes to be implemented
for unit briefs when working on live projects, competitions
and industry opportunities as they arise, (provided
they afford students the opportunity to fulfil the
unit Learning Outcomes).
A written artefact may form part of a Portfolio / E-Portfolio
of work and must be aligned with the Learning Outcomes
for the unit. The requirements for assessment must also
be clear within the assessment matrix provided during
the unit introduction/briefing and via the unit brief.
A clear description of the expected written artefact must
be provided via the unit brief along with expected word
counts. Word count guidance is provided in Precept
37 of LTAF Section 2.

45

SECTION 3: AUB ROADMAP AND GUIDANCE

Process Work

Process work provides the documentation of a series
of development work and / or steps that creatives, artists
and designers go through to generate ideas and outcomes.
The type of work that would be expected within process
work might include, but not be limited to:
— project planning
— developmental research
— developmental experimentation
— annotation of development work.
The amount of process work required must be specified via
the unit brief. This could be page counts or word counts
depending on the type of work.

Case Study

A case study would be used to explore an identified problem
or issue within a real-world context. This would usually
involve the student undertaking a broad range of reading
or research to analyse what is happening within the specific
case being investigated.
Students might be required to tackle a case study
assessment task in different ways, for example:
— a case study would be provided for students to analyse
— case studies might be used as a method for researching
a subject or issue.
The amount of work required for the case study (including
word counts) must be specified via the unit brief.

Business Plan

A business plan provides an overview of the way in which a
company is intended to operate. These would include but
not be limited to:
— the main goals of the business are
— how much money it will need to achieve its’ intended goals
— what activities will be performed by the business
— what investments will be required to achieve the
business goals what marketing and communication
activities would be deployed.
The amount and type of work required and the style of
presentation for the business plan (including word counts)
must be specified via the unit brief. Word count guidance
is provided in Precept 37 of LTAF Section 2.

46

SECTION 3: AUB ROADMAP AND GUIDANCE

Reflective Journal

A reflective journal provides a personal record of a student’s
reflections on their learning experiences during a unit.
Usually taking the form of a written document or blog, it is
a space where students record and reflect upon their own
work, progress and outcomes, providing personal responses
to situations that have occurred during their study.
A reflective journal could also include visual or creative
work and could also be in response to work experience or
placement opportunities.
Word counts must be provided for all reflective journals,
whether these are to be assessed formatively or
summatively via the unit brief. Word count guidance is
provided in Precept 37 of LTAF Section 2.

Reflective
Commentary

A written reflective commentary provides an overview of
a student's reflection upon their learning experience once
they have reached the end of a project or work experience
/ placement. It will usually be written but could also include
visual or creative work.
Word count guidance is provided in Precept 37 of LTAF
Section 2.

Sketchbook

A sketchbook serves as a space for collecting research,
ideas, and a record of work-in-progress. It might be utilised
as an assessment tool to cultivate and refine ideas during a
project. It also acts as a platform for students to summarise,
annotate and evaluate their ideas and concepts.
The amount of work required for the sketchbook must
be specified by page count. The amount of written,
creative or research work should be clearly
communicated via the unit brief.

47

SECTION 3: AUB ROADMAP AND GUIDANCE

Visual Report

A visual report provides an overview of a specific
subject, industry or project related issue, presented
as a graphically designed creative outcome, often
including, but not limited to:
— industry trends and outlooks
— design and creative directions
— industry performance, and forecasts
— market intelligence (business and consumer)
— primary and / or secondary research
— focus on relevant major industries
(country specific or global).
Word counts must be provided for all industry reports
via the unit brief, whether these are to be assessed
formatively or summatively. Word count guidance is
provided in Precept 37 of LTAF Section 2.

Performance

Performance refers to a student’s contribution to a live
presentation of a play, dance or other entertainment.
It must be clear to students via the unit brief how
their individual performance is judged, and whether
their mark will be individual or affected by the
overall success of the group.

Impact
Assessment
Report

A report that presents data to assess the impact of a
project on a community or situation, including but not
limited to:
— environmental
— social
— economic
— competitor environment.
Word counts must be provided for all industry reports
via the unit brief, whether these are to be assessed
formatively or summatively. Word count guidance is
provided in Precept 37 of LTAF Section 2.

Technical File

A technical file would usually contain a selection of work
that contribute to an outcome. A technical file might often
include but be not limited to:
— samples / prototypes
— patterns / technical drawings
— construction notes
— materials.
The type and amount of work required for the technical
file must be specified, via the unit brief.

48

SECTION 3: AUB ROADMAP AND GUIDANCE

Using the AUB Assessment Matrix
AUB requires all taught units to utilise an assessment rubric, (referred to as an assessment
matrix by AUB).
The assessment matrix is a type of scoring guide that assesses and articulates specific
components and expectations for an assignment; the matrix can be used for all assignment
types: eg, research papers, group projects, portfolios, and presentations.
The assessment matrix can also be considered as a tool that helps teaching staff to assess
student work. The matrix should contain the unit Learning Outcomes, and qualitative grade
descriptors that articulate the standards against which student work is assessed (please
see page 13 for an illustrative example).
Why use an assessment matrix?
Using an assessment matrix can aid the assessment process by allowing assessors to:
— assess assignments consistently from student-to-student
— save time when marking
— provide effective feedback and promote student learning reflection
— ensure marking decisions are transparent, equitable, valid and reliable
— clarify expectations and elements of assessment requirements for both students and
teaching staff.
The matrix will help students to:
— understand the expectations and elements of assessment
— become more aware of their learning process and progress in alignment with
the Learning Outcomes for the unit
— focus and direct student effort so that their work is aligned to the expectations
within the matrix
— Improve work through timely and detailed feedback
— make explicit and thus transparent the criteria and standards that will be used to grade
their assessment (this is aligned to a question in the National Students Survey)
— understand how marking is fair (this is aligned to a question in the National
Students Survey).
Engaging students with the assessment matrix
Activities that encourage students to actively engage with the assessment Learning
Outcomes and standards throughout their course have been evidenced as helping
student achievement, resulting in significant learning gains (Jones et al., 2017).
Student engagement with the assessment matrix helps students to understand more
deeply the standards and criteria that will be used to assess their work but can also help
them to develop their identities as independent learners.
There are several methods that could be used to engage students with the matrix and the
standards that will be used to assess their work.

49

SECTION 3: AUB ROADMAP AND GUIDANCE

These activities might include:
— self and/or peer assessment formative activities where students review theirs/each
other’s work against the criteria before submission
— students working in group sessions during which they would mark and comment on other
students work using the assessment matrix. Students could then explain and justify
their marks and comments to the group. After each group has fed back, the lecturer then
explains the rationale for the mark assigned to the exemplars and the strengths and areas
of improvement/that could be approached differently regarding each exemplar.
Jones et al. (2017) argue that such activities that encourage student engagement with this
type of activity using an assessment matrix can be particularly effective for student learning
when introduced at an early stage of their education journey.

Undergraduate Assessment Matrix Sample
Undergraduate
Assessment
Matrix

Course: BA | (Hons) Garden Design
Unit Title: Design Principles

Unit Credit: 40

Unit Learning
Outcomes

Level of achievement indicators
0-38
42-48
52-58

62-68

72-78

82+

Apply critical thinking
skills to analyse and
evaluate design concepts
and their effectiveness
in different contexts.

Lack of critical
thinking, analysis or
evaluation of design
concepts in any
contexts.

Clearly articulated
critical thinking.
Good level of
analysis and indepth evaluation
of design concepts
within a range of
contexts. The work
demonstrates
a strong
understanding
of the materials
introduced in
the unit.

Clearly articulated
and well-developed
critical thinking,
with excellent
indepth analysis.
Well evidenced
and considered
evaluation of
complex design
concepts within
a broad range of
contexts. The work
reaches beyond
the materials
introduced in
the unit.

Clear and welldeveloped critical
thinking, with
outstanding in-depth
analysis. Professional
level of evaluation
of complex design
concepts within
a broad range of
contexts. The work
reaches beyond
the materials
introduced in the unit
and demonstrates
industry level
approach.

Employ effective
collaboration
methods with
appropriate internal
and external
partners and
stakeholders.
Analyse the
outcomes/impacts
of a project.
Feedback and Feedforward: xmcndofnjdjd[p

Adequate critical
thinking, analysis
and evaluation of
design concepts
within limited
ranges of contexts.

Good level of
critical thinking
demonsrated
along with some
good attempts
at analysis and
evaluation of design
concepts within a
range of contexts.

50

THE AUB LEARNING, TEACHING AND ASSESSMENT FRAMEWORK

51

SECTION 3: AUB ROADMAP AND GUIDANCE

Assessment Feedback
Feedback is vital to enhance student learning and is a
central part of the assessment process. AUB recognises the
importance of parity and consistency across courses, units and
levels of study to ensure that each student is given the same
opportunity to engage with constructive, clear and fair feedback
provided in a timely manner to be of most help to all students.
Feedback and feedforward will be provided to students in a variety of ways. Some of these
are formal – through the communication of the final feedback and mark for a unit, via written
comments (which could also be delivered using other formats such as video or audio).
Others are less formal, especially in the case of formative tasks; conversations that take
place during crits and studio practice sessions could also be considered as feedback on
progress. Other feedback methods may be more structured, but still interactive: a progress
tutorial, or a discussion of the final work.

Providing High Quality Feedback
The following guidance relates primarily to summative assessment feedback; but the same
principles often apply to formative assessment feedback.
Feedback and feedforward do two key things:
— justify the mark, explaining to a student where they have done well and what could have
been done better (feedback)
— explain how the work be improved going forward (feedforward).
Good feedback is always clear, honest and fair. There should be consistency between the
mark awarded and the comments provided, it should always be clear to students how the
feedback provided is aligned explicitly against the unit Learning Outcomes.
Feedback should emphasise what a student has done well, providing motivation and
encouragement; feedforward should serve to help students to reflect on their performance
and consider how they could develop and/or improve, even the highest achievers are keen
to know how they might continue to develop. Good quality feedback and feedforward
allows students to understand feedback as a reflective process: a continual dialogue which
enhances their learning.
Feedback and marks should always be provided to students within four working weeks
of the unit assessment submission date, ideally sooner where possible.
The feedback date must be published via the unit brief to enable students to understand
when feedback and marks can be expected.
Justifying the mark
The Wiseflow system asks the assessor to report on indicative performance against
each learning outcome, as well as an overall summative mark. This overall mark is not
an arithmetic calculation – it is an academic judgement of how well the outcome was
resolved and should be holistic. (For example, comparatively good or poor performance
against one specific learning outcome could have a very major effect overall; or might be
less significant.)

52

SECTION 3: AUB ROADMAP AND GUIDANCE

Feedback / feedforward comments should be clear in relation to whether the expected
standards were met, and how the student’s work achieves or falls short of these. It should
be evident to the student, as the recipient of the feedback, why the mark awarded is not
higher, and what would have been required to achieve a better mark.
The university assessment matrix should be used for providing feedback to students,
this should be written in alignment with the Learning Outcomes for the unit and provided
to students as guidance during the unit introduction briefing at the start of term.
Explaining to a student how they can improve - feedforward
It is important to celebrate what a student has done well. It is rare that a serious attempt at an
assignment does not include any successful elements, or at least some elements which are
more successful than others. Highlighting these areas can promote confidence and self-belief,
and validate the efforts demonstrated.
When identifying areas for improvement, good practice suggests that it is worth focusing on
no more than three areas of the work. Even if it would be possible to identify a much longer
list of weaknesses, referring to all of these is unlikely to be productive. Picking out three points
which would make a real difference to the quality of the work, and are realistically achievable,
will have a much greater impact.
Feedback comments need to be clear: readily understood by the student, with an obvious link
to the work and the relevant learning outcome/s. It might be useful to structure feedback into
discrete sections, for example:
1. refer back to the unit aims and Learning Outcomes (primarily justifying the mark)
2. commenting on the progress made and any particular achievements
3. looking ahead and identifying areas on which a student can improve or build if they wish
to continue to develop their skills (feedforward).
When feedforward is provided successfully, it allows the student the opportunity to identify
areas of their knowledge or skills upon which they need to concentrate; or to identify aspects
of their learning behaviour which are not enabling them to perform to their full potential.
This could be about how they organise their time, or the way in which they approach research.
These general points of advice may be useful:
— Feedback is not personal: it is about the work. It should be recognised that human beings
tend to focus overly on the negative, and to see criticism as personal, especially for longer
and more self-directed pieces of work. That immediately makes a receiver of feedback feel
defensive, and less likely to engage with what is being said or written.
— Well-articulated, constructive feedback can help to bolster self-esteem and encourage a
student to take responsibility for improving, which means that the language used to convey
comments can make a significant difference in how feedback is received. Regular reference
should be made to the work (eg “this work would have been better if”, rather than “you
would have done better if”).
— Try to turn negative comments into positive feedforward advice. Instead of “you haven’t
referred to the most recent research”, use a formulation like “this work would have been
improved by referring to recent research, such as…”.

53

SECTION 3: AUB ROADMAP AND GUIDANCE

It can also be useful to set expectations from the start of the course and/or unit and refer
to this regularly via the assessment matrix and the unit brief, especially shortly before unit
deadlines. For example, students could be reminded that:
— even work of the highest level is not usually perfect, and there will always be room
for improvement
— the process of making and developing work has considerable learning value (it's not just
about the outcome)
— assessment is part of the process, and a way of consolidating learning; in producing
the output, whatever its form, a student will have learned more than they realise
— Feedback / feedforward – both the summative mark, and the comments – represents
an opportunity to reflect, engage and improve; abilities are not fixed, and can be
developed by focusing on the areas which have not yet been mastered.

Collaborative / Group Work
AUB values collaboration as a key graduate attribute. Group and cross-disciplinary learning
and teaching is highly beneficial and increases students’ understanding of industry
practices. By encouraging cross-course participation, peer learning, team working skills and
group project management the enhancement of analytical and cognitive skills is significantly
increased, thus increasing graduate employability.
Many courses at AUB include units within which the final assessment requirements include
outcomes achieved through group or collaborative working. This may include a performance;
a film or animation; an event; or any project where two or more students have worked
together to produce the required assessment outcome.
Groups may be established through student choice, or through staff allocation. In all cases
it is important to provide some induction to group working, and to support each group to
have positive and constructive interactions. This includes being clear about each student’s
responsibility to participate, and to contribute effectively to the outcome; students
can begin by taking on roles within the group or by creating team agreements and/or
commitments that will define individual roles for the duration of the project.
Despite best endeavours, some groups can become dysfunctional or encounter issues
with individual members. In these instances, the course team needs to be clear about what
steps will be taken to enable the students to continue with their learning without being
disadvantaged. Groups can also be hampered through extraneous circumstances (such as
the prolonged absence of a group member through illness, intermission or even withdrawal);
this may require a revision to the expected output, or it may be that the circumstances
need to be considered when assessing the work. Group work assessment requirements
should be designed in such a way that individual students are able to demonstrate their
reflections on the group and their own individual contribution.
In the case of group work assessment, it is important to consider how failure could be
retrieved, and especially the failure of one individual within a group where the remaining
group members pass.

54

SECTION 3: AUB ROADMAP AND GUIDANCE

Assessment of Collaborative or Group Work
There are many possible ways of assessing collaborative work. It is important to select
the most appropriate approach in each case, and to be explicit to students about how
they will be assessed via the unit brief. The fundamental underlying principle is that the
marks awarded for the assessment should be allocated in a way that consistently rewards
students for achieving the learning objectives.
It is important to note that the assessment design and strategy for units that require
formative or summative assessed group outcomes should be done at course
development and writing stage. All assessment requirements communicated to
students via unit briefs must be in line with the formal validated unit descriptor.
Assessment methods may include:
— Assessing the work against the
Learning Outcomes, and awarding
the same mark to all group members
This is the simplest way of assessing the
work. However, students can often think
that this is unfair, as some group members
may be perceived to have spent less time
on the task or made a lesser contribution.
It also implies that all group members have
mastered and demonstrated the Learning
Outcomes to an identical extent; there may
be occasions where this judgement is valid,
but often it will be difficult to determine.
—A
 ssessing the work against the
Learning Outcomes, but adjusting the
marks of individual group members
The risk of a group member being perceived
as ‘freeloading’ can be reduced by
introducing an additional element to the
assessment process whereby the marks
for individual group members are adjusted
according to set criteria. This could include
peer review, where all group members
are asked to evaluate the contribution
made by others in their group against
criteria established in advance by the Unit
Leader. (This should only be included where
students have previously had an induction
into peer evaluation and have had the
opportunity to undertake peer evaluation in
a non-assessed setting.) Groups can also
be asked to keep notes of meetings, or a log
of actions, to support their decisions; or all
members can be asked to keep a reflective
journal alongside the main activity.

If this approach is used, it is not uncommon
for the average mark of group members to
be the mark awarded for the outcome.
— Individual Learning Agreements
There may be occasions where it is preferable
for each student to prepare an individual
Learning Agreement against which they will
be assessed. This will be most effective
for assessment components that require
specific tasks and can be separately
assessed. Clarity is required about how
success in the task is determined: for
example, is it possible that a student could
successfully meet the terms of their Learning
Agreement to a very high standard, but the
final group output be poor?
— Combination of methods
In some instances, a combination of the
above methods may be the most reliable
approach to assessment. For example, the
assessment could be designed to include two
assessed elements, such that one mark might
be awarded to all group members for the final
work; and a second mark awarded to each
individual for a reflective journal or Learning
Agreement. These could be equally weighted
(50:50), or one part could be weighted more
heavily depending on the importance of each
assessed element and the way that the
assessment has been designed.
In all cases, it must be clear and obvious to
students what they are expected to achieve,
and how they will be assessed on the unit via
the unit brief.

55

SECTION 3: AUB ROADMAP AND GUIDANCE

Provision of Written Summative Assessment Feedback
It is important for all students at AUB to receive a reasonable level of feedback for
work that they complete for assessment. The quantity of feedback provided should
be proportionate to the work required for assessment and presented in an accessible
format via the unit assessment matrix.
To ensure consistency, AUB sets indicative wordcount expectations for formal summative
feedback. These wordcounts apply to units (not individual assessment components).
These are as follows:
Unit Size

Unit Level

Written Feedback Word Count Expectation

20

4

450 - 500 words

40

4

600 - 700 words

20

5

450 - 500 words

40

5

600 - 700 words

20

6

450 - 500 words

40

6

600 - 700 words

60

6

600 - 700 words

60

7

600 - 700 words

If there is a preference or requirement to provide formal feedback using video or audio clips,
the following is an approximate guide:
Unit Size

Unit Level

Expected Recorded Feedback Length

20

4

2 ½ minutes

40

4

4 minutes

20

5

2 ½ minutes

40

5

4 minutes

20

6

2 ½ minutes

40

6

4 minutes

60

6

4 minutes

60

7

4 minutes

*NOTE: If providing recorded feedback, a brief written justification of the mark, and the mark
itself, MUST be provided using the Wiseflow system. This ensures accessibility for students,
external examiners, and the University (for example, in the event of an appeal). The recorded
feedback must also be available for verification or moderation if required.

56

SECTION 3: AUB ROADMAP AND GUIDANCE

Presentation of Unit Briefs
AUB is focused on ensuring that students have all the information that they need to
successfully complete their unit assessments. Students should be provided with a unit brief
on the first day that teaching for a unit begin, unit teaching should always begins with a Unit
introduction briefing during which students should be provided with a full overview of the
Learning Outcomes and assessment outcome expectations. This should be accompanied
by an introduction to the assessment matrix.
Minimum expectations of information to be communicated via the unit brief:
— start and end date of the unit teaching
— unit description
— assessment requirements - each assessment element should be explained in detail
— teaching schedule shown week by week
— assessment submission deadlines (date and time)
— method by which assessment outcomes should be submitted
— reading list
— assessment feedback dates / marks and feedback publication date
— unit assessment matrix.
Unit briefs should be placed on Canvas to provide continual access for all students.
Unit briefs should always be checked to ensure they are accessible for all learners.
Date of LTAF publication November 2023.

References
Jones, L., Allen, B., Dunn, P. and Brooker, L. (2017). Demystifying the rubric: a five-step pedagogy
to improve student understanding and utilisation of marking criteria. Higher Education
Research & Development, 36(1), 129-142. [online] Available at: https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/
pdf/10.1080/07294360.2016.1177000?needAccess=tr ue [Accessed 20 August 2018].

57

THE AUB LEARNING, TEACHING AND ASSESSMENT FRAMEWORK

Arts University Bournemouth
Fern Barrow
Wallisdown
Poole
BH12 5HH
