2025/26

Academic Integrity and Misconduct (AIM) Policy and

Procedures

Please see a list of terminology/definitions at Appendix 1. This document refers to ‘you’
(which means ‘the student/students’) and ‘we’ (which means ‘Birkbeck, University of

London’ or ‘the College’).

Introduction
1.
Birkbeck, University of London (hereafter abbreviated to ‘the College’) has an
obligation to maintain the standards of its awards (and those it offers on behalf of
the University of London) by ensuring the integrity of all aspects of the assessment
process. The College has signed up to the Academic Integrity Charter and is
committed to upholding academic integrity across the College community.
2.

The College expects that when completing work for assessment, you will adhere to
the College’s Academic Integrity and Misconduct Policy and not take action which
might give you an unfair advantage.

3.

The purpose of the policy is to outline:
a.

what constitutes academic integrity and academic misconduct;

c.

how suspected academic misconduct will be considered;

b. some examples of academic misconduct and how they are categorised;

d. what outcomes students can reasonably expect;

e. how students can appeal a finding of academic misconduct; and
f.

4.

5.

where students and Panels can find further information, advice and guidance.

This policy applies to any piece of work submitted for assessment towards an award

at Birkbeck, University of London.

Where applicable for undergraduate students, this policy takes precedence over

paragraph 21 of the Common Awards Scheme Regulations for Taught Programmes
of Study relating to reassessment arrangements. This means, for example, that the

outcome for an upheld academic misconduct might mean that you have to retake a

module, even if you were only on your first attempt. In this case you will in effect

have forfeited the capped, in-year reassessment usually offered at second attempt.

1

2025/26

6.

This policy also takes precedence over paragraph 24 of the Common Awards

Scheme Regulations for Taught Programmes of Study relating to compensated

credit. This means that you will not be eligible for compensated credit if you fail a

module due to an upheld allegation. If the upheld academic misconduct is proven
on your second or subsequent attempt at the module, you cannot revert to an
earlier failed attempt to claim compensated credit.
Why is academic integrity important?

7.

Part of your study is to develop key skills such as critical thinking, evaluating

evidence, and the ability to develop your academic writing. Ensuring that academic

integrity is observed at all times means that marks and academic credit are awarded
for work which accurately demonstrates your true efforts and abilities and prevents
students who have produced work by unfair means from being advantaged for
doing so.
8.

The College has a ‘whole community’ approach to academic integrity. This means

that every member of the College, whether a student or a member of staff, has a
responsibility to maintain academic integrity.

9.

For staff, this means that the College has a responsibility to support you in your

learning and to provide you with the tools to avoid academic misconduct. It also

means that where you suspect that a student has produced work that breaches the
Academic Integrity and Misconduct Policy, you have an obligation to report it for
investigation.

10.

For students, this means that you must:
a.

properly acknowledge all sources of information, knowledge, and ideas by
consistently and correctly using an acceptable referencing system;

b. produce work that is wholly your own work (and see item c below);
c.

where an assessment brief specifically requires a single piece of work be

submitted on behalf of a group of students, you should ensure that each

student’s contribution to group work is represented honestly;

d. encourage others to behave with academic integrity;
e. comply with all assessment instructions;
f.

adhere to and comply with all applicable regulatory, legal and professional

obligations and follow any relevant ethical requirements;

g. present accurate information and data that has been obtained appropriately;
2

2025/26

h. represent honestly the results of research or experimental data; and

i.

avoid any action which would give you an unfair advantage over others.

11.

If you fail to adhere to these principles of academic integrity, your work may be

12.

Some types of academic misconduct are listed alphabetically below. This list is not

suspected of academic misconduct.

exhaustive, and the Academic Integrity and Misconduct Policy may be breached in
ways not specifically referred to here.
a.

‘Collusion’ means presenting work as your own that has been done in

unauthorised partnership with someone else, where this is not permitted by the
requirements of the assessment.

b. ‘Contract cheating’, also known as ‘essay mills’, ‘ghost writers’ or ‘third-party
cheating’, means submitting work as your own that has been purchased or

commissioned from someone else. A fee does not have to be paid for contract
cheating to have taken place. This might include using generative artificial

intelligence tools such as ChatGPT to create content and/or argument for your
assessment which you then present as your own intellectual work. If you are

permitted to use generative AI tools to create content, this will be included in

c.

the assessment brief with guidance.

‘Examination misconduct’ can include using the wrong or unauthorised

equipment in an examination, such as a calculator or earpieces; accessing an

examination paper or questions ahead of an assessment; and taking
unauthorised notes or material into an examination.

d. ‘Fabrication’ means creating false data or other aspects of research or assessed
work.

e. ‘Falsification’ means falsely claiming to have carried out part of an assessment,
such as experiments, observations, interviews, or any form of research and/or

f.

data collection.

‘Impersonation’ means assuming the identity of another student, or allowing
someone to assume your identity, in an assessment.

g. ‘Plagiarism’ is when you present work as if it is your own, without full, accurate,
and appropriate referencing. This can include paraphrasing someone else’s

work without citing the original source or copying/taking credit for someone
else’s argument even if you put it into your own words. This can also include
using generative AI tools which can take other people’s words and ideas
without reference.

3

2025/26

h. ‘Self-plagiarism’ involves submitting the same work for credit more than once,
where this is not permitted by the requirements of the assessment. This could
mean duplicating work:

• that you submitted on a previous attempt at the same assessment;
• that you submitted on another module;

• that you submitted when studying towards another programme or at
another institution; or

• that you have produced during your academic study and you have had

published elsewhere, for example in an academic journal, without adequate
citation and referencing (and this might also have copyright issues).

13.

Proofreading is an essential skill in the academic writing process. You should

proofread your own work and should always allow plenty of proofreading time

before submitting your work to correct any typographical, grammatical and spelling
errors. Study Skills support is available to help you in this process. The Learning

Development team provides guidance on using proof-reading or grammar-

checking software without being at risk of academic misconduct. The College
recommends that you do not use professional third-party services.

14.

The College is committed to ethical and responsible use of generative AI. This

includes upholding our academic integrity (for staff and students). The College

seeks to prepare its staff and students to work in an increasingly AI-enabled world.
For detailed guidance, refer to supporting study information and guidance.

15.

For more information on avoiding plagiarism and for additional support, please see
the College’s Plagiarism Guidelines. You can also:

a.

visit the Birkbeck Library and Information skills Moodle module, which includes
online tools on how to reference, and how to avoid plagiarism

b. explore the Study Skills support available
c.

book a place on one of the Learning Development workshops that run
throughout the year. These are listed in My Birkbeck.

How we determine whether misconduct has taken place
16. If the College suspects academic misconduct has occurred, it is the responsibility of
the College to prove the allegation against you. The standard of proof required is
that of a balance of probabilities. A balance of probabilities means that it is more
4

2025/26

likely than not that academic misconduct has occurred.
17.

The College considers academic misconduct using the concept of ‘strict liability’.

This means that academic misconduct can take place when you do something that,
looked at from the marker's or invigilator's point of view, can reasonably be

construed as academic misconduct, whether you meant to do this or not. This

means that your intention, appreciation of risks and things like failure to check your
work are not taken into account when determining whether misconduct has taken
place However, these factors may be considered when determining whether it is
appropriate to apply any penalty.

18.

19.

Mitigating circumstances will not be considered when determining whether

academic misconduct has occurred.

Identifying suspected academic misconduct will often, but not always, involve

academic judgment. This is based on the scholarly and/or professional knowledge
and expertise which academic staff and external examiners draw upon in reaching

academic decisions about assessment. Examples of academic judgment might

include deciding the extent of the plagiarism or other academic misconduct (for

example by interpreting Turnitin reports, or by assessing whether content has been
appropriately or inappropriately paraphrased); in cases of alleged collusion,

determining whether identical answers across more than one student’s assessments
is outside of common usage in the subject area; or deciding whether the standard

of work is out of line with your other assessments, or whether your notes and drafts
support a case that the submitted work is your own.

20.

Where a marker considers something not to be ‘misconduct’ but rather poor

academic practice, this will be referred to the Supporting Good Academic Practice

Policy. Where a marker suspects that academic misconduct has occurred, they will
inform the Sub-Board using a Suspected Academic Misconduct form.

21.

The College offers modules that are taught between its Schools and where a

module(s) from one School may form part of the programme offered by another
School. In cases of suspected academic misconduct, the Faculty that ‘owns’ the

module concerned will be responsible for dealing with the academic misconduct.
The Academic Integrity and Misconduct Lead (or their nominee) for the home

School for that module will also be informed that an investigation is underway and

of the outcome. If the School that identifies the misconduct is not the student’s
5

2025/26

home School, they should inform the home School as soon as is practicable and

usually within five working days.
22.

If a suspected academic misconduct occurs during an in-person examination, the
invigilator will complete a report which will be provided to the relevant central
support team (for example, Examinations). The team will confirm whether the
matter is progressed to an Academic Misconduct Panel.

23.

Online examinations will be treated in the same way as a submitted piece of online
assessment.

Viva voce
24. A viva voce is different from an Academic Misconduct Panel Meeting and will not
require you to respond to an allegation of misconduct. The viva should not extend
to areas of your overall programme (for example, other modules), not covered by
the assessment suspected of academic misconduct.
25.

The purpose of the viva is to allow you to demonstrate your knowledge of the

26.

A viva voce examination is conducted by two members of academic staff, at least

subject matter being assessed and your process for completing the work.

one of whom has not been involved in marking the originally submitted work. A
note will be taken of the viva either by a separate note-taker or one of the viva

examiners (provided they did not mark the original work). These notes may be used
as evidence in their deliberations by a Panel convened to consider academic
misconduct under this Policy and Procedures.

27.

If you fail to attend the viva or request an alternative date, then you will be offered
one further date. If you do not respond or fail to attend without reasonable

explanation, the matter will usually be referred to an Academic Misconduct Panel.

28.

You will not usually be permitted to bring someone with you to a viva, unless it is

deemed necessary e.g. if support in such situations is considered necessary within
your Study Support Plan (SSP).

29.

If you do not engage with the request to attend a viva or provide a reasonable

explanation for non-attendance, this matter may be referred under the Academic
6

2025/26

Integrity and Misconduct policy for a Panel to consider.
30.

There are two possible outcomes from a viva voce: either there is insufficient

evidence, and the matter will be closed and a note made on your student record, or
there is sufficient evidence, and the matter will be referred to an Academic
Misconduct Panel for further action.

Stage One: Faculty-level Academic Misconduct Panel
31. The Faculty Head of Education and Student Experience will depute to one of the
Academic Misconduct and Integrity Leads the operation of a Panel comprising a
minimum of two academic members of staff, including a Chair, to consider the
allegation. The Panel will not include any member of academic staff who has been
involved in referring the allegation under consideration; where administratively
practicable, it will not include any member of academic staff involved in previous
investigations regarding the student. The diversity of the Panel will be considered
when the Panel is convened.
32.

You will be informed of the suspected misconduct including the alleged

category/categories of misconduct and details of any investigation undertaken and

will receive copies of any evidence to be used to support the allegation. You will be

offered the opportunity to make representations to the Panel. This can be in writing
and/or by attending the Panel and speaking in person. If you admit to the alleged
misconduct, a formal Panel will not be scheduled. You will be informed of the

outcome applied in writing, within 10 working days. Possible outcomes are listed in
Appendix 3 of this policy.
33.

If you contest the allegation, a Panel Meeting will take place. If you wish to attend
the Meeting, you will be offered a date. If you do not respond within 10 working

days without good reason, or decline the date offered, the Panel may decide the
case in your absence.

34.

You may choose to be accompanied by a companion, who should be a member of
the College (for example a fellow student, member of staff, someone from the
Student Union Advice team or a College-approved mentor). The role of the

companion is to provide support to you. Anyone acting in a companion role is not a

member of the Panel and will not be involved in determining the outcome.

Companions may not contribute to any Panel Meeting unless invited to do so by
7

2025/26

the Panel. Companions shall not be professional legal representatives.
35.

Where the finding is that misconduct has occurred, the Panel will apply an

outcome, a list of which is provided in Appendix 3. In addition, you may be asked to
undertake specific tuition in relation to academic misconduct.

36. The Panel will inform you of its decision within five working days.
37.

If more than one allegation of academic misconduct is suspected during the same
assessment period and before you are informed about the allegation, this will be
considered as one incident under this policy. In another words, if more than one
instance of academic misconduct is suspected concurrently but only discovered
subsequently, this would only be considered as one allegation.

38.

Further allegations of academic misconduct, or allegations brought against you in
your second or subsequent year of study, will be considered at a new Academic
Misconduct Panel.

Stage Two: College-level Academic Misconduct Panel
39. The Student Complaints, Conduct and Appeals team will convene a Panel in
circumstances including but not limited to the following:
a. you already have two proven instances of academic misconduct;
b. the allegation fits one of the categories of serious academic misconduct as
outlined in Appendix 2; and/or
c. the allegation (including for a first or second proven misconduct) may lead to
the termination of your registration, for example because you are on your final
permissible assessment attempt.
40. The Panel comprises a minimum of two members of academic staff, one of whom
shall be Chair, and a representative from the Students’ Union, to consider the case.
The Panel will not include any member of staff who has participated in Misconduct
Panels pertaining to the cases under review. The diversity of the Panel will be
considered when the Panel is convened.
41.

You will be informed of the suspected misconduct including the alleged

category/categories of misconduct and details of any investigation undertaken and

will receive copies of any evidence to be used to support the allegation. You will be

offered the opportunity to make representations to the Panel. This can be in writing
and/or by attending the Panel and speaking in person. If you admit to the alleged
8

2025/26

misconduct, a formal Panel will not be scheduled. You will be informed of the

outcome applied in writing, within 10 working days. Possible outcomes are listed in
Appendix 3 of this policy.
42.

If you contest the allegation, a Panel Meeting will take place. If you wish to attend
the Meeting, you will be offered a date. If you do not respond within 10 working

days without good reason, or decline the date offered, the Panel may decide the
case in your absence.
43.

You may choose to be accompanied by a companion, who should be a member of
the College (for example a fellow student, member of staff, someone from the
Student Union Advice team or a College-approved mentor). The role of the

companion is to provide support to you. Anyone acting in a companion role is not a
member of the Panel and will not be involved in determining the outcome.

Companions may not contribute to any Meeting unless invited to do so by the

Panel. Companions shall not be professional legal representatives.
44.

Where the finding is that misconduct has occurred, the Panel will apply an

outcome, a list of which is stipulated in Appendix 3. See the next section for how

outcomes are applied. In addition, you may be asked to undertake specific tuition in
relation to academic misconduct.

45.

The Panel will inform you of its decision within 10 working days.

How outcomes are applied
46. Where the work of a student has been suspected of multiple allegations of
academic misconduct, previous proven misconduct may be considered when
determining an appropriate outcome.
47.

If your third or more allegation of academic misconduct proceeds to a Stage TwoCollege-level Academic Misconduct Panel, the outcome will normally be higher
than the previously imposed outcome.

Appeal
48. You can appeal decisions made at any stage of this policy by submitting an appeal
form, following the College’s Appeals Policy and Procedure.

9

2025/26

Impact of reported allegations of misconduct on marking/awards
49. Where an allegation of an academic misconduct has been made and the case is
being investigated, you will not be disadvantaged unless there is evidence to
substantiate an allegation with an associated outcome. Where alleged academic
misconduct is under investigation, the relevant Board of Examiners will not defer a
decision on your progression or classification until the investigation is completed.
50.

In the instance that an allegation of academic misconduct is made, you should
continue with your studies while the investigation is ongoing, including by

continuing to attend teaching and submitting work for assessment. If you stop
attending or submitting work, you may be subjected to the College’s usual

procedures in relation to attendance and to satisfactory academic progress; see the
Common Awards Scheme Regulations for Taught Programmes of Study, the

Student Engagement and Attendance Policy, and the Termination Policy for more
information.
51.

Marking of the work in question, progression and enrolment will be processed in

52.

If you are in the final year of your programme and about to graduate but alleged

the normal way where alleged academic misconduct is under investigation.

academic misconduct is under investigation, the relevant Board of Examiners will

not confirm and confer your final award until the outcome (and where appropriate
appeal) has reached a conclusion.

53.

Your academic transcript does not include reference to academic misconduct

allegations, whether proven or otherwise. Transcripts solely provide details on the
final marks awarded for modules taken, together with the class of award made
(where appropriate).

Academic misconduct after a mark of module result has been assigned or an

award has been made
54. If evidence of proven academic misconduct is produced after a mark has been
awarded, the mark, module result or an entire award may be revoked.
55.

The College will consider whether to revoke a mark, module or degree result as a

result of academic misconduct in accordance with the stages and outcomes of this

Policy and Procedures. The result of any Panel should be communicated to the
10

2025/26

relevant Sub-Board Chair. Where a decision is made to revoke a degree, the Chair
of the relevant College Board of Examiners will also be informed.

Created:

June 2008

Date of next review:

2025-2026 academic year

SLT owner:

DVC Education and Student Experience

Latest update:
Owner:

July 2025

Student Complaints, Conduct and Appeals Manager

Committee oversight: Education and Student Experience Committee for Academic Board

11

2025/26

Appendix 1- Terminology/definitions
1.
‘the College’ refers to Birkbeck, University of London.
2.

‘You’ means ‘the student/students’, i.e. a person/people registered to study at the

3.

‘Academic integrity’ means being honest in your academic work, taking

College.

responsibility for the contents of the work that you produce, and making sure that
you formally recognise and reference the existing knowledge and ideas on which
your work is based.

4.

‘Academic judgment’ is a judgment that is made about a matter where the opinion
of an academic expert is essential: for example, a judgment about marks awarded,
degree classification, research methodology, whether feedback is correct or
adequate, and the content or outcomes of a course.

5.

‘Academic misconduct’ means a breach of academic integrity, through actions

which could lead you to gain an unfair academic advantage in an assessment; for
example, by taking credit for someone else’s work, words, or ideas. Academic
misconduct can be broken down into two categories:

a.

‘academic misconduct’ covers medium-level plagiarism, and allegations of
minor exam misconduct.

b. ‘serious academic misconduct’ is the most serious category of allegation and
suggests intention to deceive. Students committing these do not have a

sufficient understanding of the course content or study skills to progress.
6.

An ‘Academic Misconduct Panel’ or ‘Panel Meeting’ is a body of academic staff

tasked with deciding whether an instance of academic misconduct has taken place

and what outcome should be imposed, if applicable. Panels can be held at Facultylevel for more minor cases of misconduct, or for more serious cases, Panels will be
run by the College’s Student Complaints, Conduct and Appeals team.
7.

‘Academic Lead for Misconduct’ is appointed by the Head of School to lead on

8.

'Essay mills' are businesses that complete work in exchange for money, for a

academic misconduct.

student who then submits it to an education provider as their own. This is known as
ghost-writing or contract cheating and is illegal in England. Essay mills are
12

2025/26

frequently involved in other forms of cybercrime and are known to blackmail
students and to whistle blow on students to their academic institution.
9.

An ‘outcome’ is the sanction applied to a student if academic misconduct is found

10.

‘Paraphrasing’ means putting someone else’s work into your own words. When you

to have been committed.

paraphrase someone else in your academic writing, you must still acknowledge the
source of the idea: you should not pass off someone else’s ideas as your own. As
with direct quotation, the full details of the source should be given in your
footnotes and bibliography (as applicable).

11.

‘Proofreading’ is the final stage of producing a piece of academic writing. It is the

process of checking your work to make sure it is of a high academic standard and
quality.

12.

‘Turnitin’ is the College's text-matching software, which detects any similarities

between submitted coursework and work published on the internet and provides
an indicative similarity report. This is a tool for alerting markers to high levels of

similarity but is not a substitute for academic judgment in detecting a breach of this
policy. A low similarity score is not a guarantee that no academic misconduct has
taken place.
13.

A ‘viva voce’ is a meeting held to test your subject knowledge and gain more
information on how you completed your assessment. It differs from oral

presentations in that you are required to respond to unknown questions around a
specified topic.

13

Appendix 2- Categories of academic misconduct
Factors such as premeditation, seriousness, level of study, intention etc. may be considered when determining what possible outcome should be
imposed. The ‘Possible Outcomes’ column listed below is for guidance and consistency only; academic judgement should ultimately determine
the appropriate outcome.
A. Academic misconduct
Category

Type of academic misconduct

Possible Outcome/s

AM1

Removing any script, paper, or other official stationery (whether completed or not) from the

Outcome 1 and Outcome 2

AM2

Possession or use of devices or hardware of any kind other than those specifically permitted in the

Outcome 1 and Outcome 2

Communicating with another student or with any third party other than the invigilator/examiner

Outcome 1 and Outcome 2

AM3

AM4

AM5
AM6
AM7

examination room, unless specifically authorised by an invigilator or examiner.
rubric of the paper, without inappropriate usage having been detected.

during an in-person examination or test, where there is no attempt made at copying the other
person’s work.

Communicating with another student or with any third party about the contents of a remote

examination or test prior to the conclusion of the assessment, including over social media or
WhatsApp, where there is no attempt made at copying the other person’s work.

Outcome 1 and Outcome 2

Extensive use of quotations or close paraphrasing without the use of quotation marks and/or

Outcome 2 and Outcome 3

Extensive use of quotations or close paraphrasing without the use of quotation marks and/or

Outcome 3 and Outcome 4

Self-plagiarism where the duplication concerned is uncited and extensive (i.e. submission of work

Outcome 3 and Outcome 4

referencing, where the student has cited the plagiarised material in the bibliography.

referencing, where the student has not cited the plagiarised material in the bibliography.

submitted previously by the student, which has contributed to the student’s mark on the current or
any previous programme, either at the College or another institution; or work submitted for
assessment that has previously been published elsewhere, including online). 1

Note that reworking material that has previously been submitted at the College but which received a failing mark (i.e. has not contributed to an overall grade) will not be
considered self-plagiarism.

1

14

AM8

AM9

AM10
AM11

General indebtedness to the ideas, arguments, and work of others, which are presented as the

student’s own and either not sufficiently or nowhere referenced, and where the arguments taken

Outcome 3 and Outcome 4

from other sources predominate over the student’s own argument.

Duplicating diagrams, computer programs, hypotheses, text, code, graphics, tabulated data or other Outcome 3 and Outcome 4
elements from books or journals; from unpublished sources such as lecture notes and handouts; or
from the web, without suitable acknowledgement and referencing.
Fabricating references.

Outcome 3 and Outcome 4

Possession of crib sheets or revision notes (including, for example, those held on digital media

Outcome 3 and Outcome 4

devices) in an in-person examination or test; accessing the internet in contravention of the
examination rubric.

AM12

Using another student’s work and submitting some or all of it as if it were the student’s own.

Outcome 3 and Outcome 4

AM13

The presentation of data in laboratory work, projects etc based on work purporting to have been

Outcome 3 and Outcome 4

AM14

During an examination or test, copying or attempting to copy the work of another student, whether

Outcome 3 and Outcome 4

AM15

carried out by the student but which has been invented, altered or falsified.

by overlooking their work, asking them for information, or by any other means including over social
media or WhatsApp.

Being party to any other arrangement that would constitute a breach of this Policy; or agreeing,

assisting, encouraging, advising or attempting to persuade another member of the College (student
or staff) to participate in actions that would breach this Policy.

B. Serious academic misconduct
Category

Type of academic misconduct

Outcome/s to consider
imposing

15

SM1

SM2

Commissioning another person or service to complete an item of College assessment, where the
commissioned work is not submitted. This could include the use of professional essay writing

services, essay banks, homework assistance sites, ghost-writing services or other tools/services.

Outcome 3 and Outcome 4

The use of proofreading services to alter, add to or improve the argument or academic quality of

Outcome 4 and Outcome 5

Using technological aids, including translation software, paraphrasing tools, text generation

Outcome 4 and Outcome 5

SM4

Where an assignment is required to be written in English, writing in a language other than English

Outcome 4 and Outcome 5

SM5

Falsifying a mitigating circumstances claim or evidence.

Outcome 4 and Outcome 5

Commissioning another person or service to complete an item of College assessment, which is then

Outcome 4 and Outcome 5

SM3

SM6

SM7
SM8
SM9
SM10
SM11
SM12

the work submitted.

software, and tools to generate text, graphics or artwork, without citation or specific authorisation.
and then using translation software or assistance from a third party to convert into English.

submitted as a student’s own work. This could include the use of professional essay writing services,
essay banks, homework assistance sites, ghost-writing services or other tools/services.

Failure to secure appropriate ethical approval in advance of conducting research, an experiment,

Outcome 4 and Outcome 5

Being party to any arrangement where a person other than the candidate impersonates, or intends

Outcome 4 and Outcome 5

Stealing another student’s work and submitting it as the student’s own work (where the originator

Outcome 4 and Outcome 5

Stealing another student’s work and submitting it as the student’s own work (where the originator

Outcome 5 and Outcome 6

Taking into an examination a pre-written examination script / answer book for submission and

Outcome 5 and Outcome 6

Obtaining access to an unseen examination or test prior to the start of an examination/test.

Outcome 5 and Outcome 6

study or similar.

to impersonate, the candidate in an examination or test.
is not denied the opportunity of submission).
is denied the opportunity of submission).

exchanging it for a blank examination script / answer book.

16

SM13

Being party to any other arrangement that would constitute a breach of this Policy; or agreeing,

assisting, encouraging, advising or attempting to persuade another member of the College (student
or staff) to participate in actions that would breach this Policy.

17

Appendix 3- Academic misconduct outcomes
Outcome 1

Issue a formal warning. The Module Convenor shall mark the work, but the mark may be reduced by a maximum of ten

marks to reflect a student’s failure to address the assessment criteria in areas of collation of sources and their citation. In

some instances, this might lead to a fail mark being awarded; in this case the marker should make this clear in their feedback
to the student.

Outcome 2

Award a mark of zero for the element of assessment in question, not determining reassessment and/or retake (as this is a

Outcome 3

Award a mark of zero for the element of assessment in question, not determining reassessment and/or retake (as this is a

Outcome 4

Award a mark of zero for the module in question, the student must retake the same module and the module result will be

Board decision). To note- a reassessment element mark would be capped at a bare pass.
Board decision). To note- a module mark would be capped at a bare pass.

capped at a bare pass. Where the module in question is an option module, the cap should be applied to any optional
module attempted by the student as a substitute. Where a retake of the same module, or suitable alternative, is not

permissible the student will be allowed to complete the academic year and to obtain an exit award, if available, but will not
be able to continue on the programme in the next academic year.
Outcome 5

Award a mark of zero for the module in question, the student must retake the same module and the module result will be
capped at a bare pass. Where the module in question is an option module, the cap should be applied to any optional
module attempted by the student as a substitute. Where a retake of the same module, or suitable alternative, is not

permissible the student will not be able to continue on the programme. Additionally the following outcome will be applied
to the student’s final award:

Undergraduate Honours - student’s final classification will be reduced by one level
Unclassified Bachelors to Diploma in Higher Education

Foundation Degree – Distinction to Merit; Merit to Pass; Pass to Certificate in Higher Education
Masters - Distinction to Merit; Merit to Pass; Pass to PG Dip

18

Outcome 6

Terminate a student’s registration and enrolment on the programme of study immediately with permission granted to exit
with an intermediate award, provided the student has satisfied the requirements for that award.

Where academic misconduct has been substantiated for a student who has completed their studies and on whom a final

award has been conferred, the most serious outcome that may be applied shall be withdrawal of the relevant final award
previously conferred on the student.

19
