Birmingham City University
Academic Misconduct Procedure
Effective from 15 September 2025
Contents
1.

Introduction .................................................................................................................... 1

2.

Who does this procedure apply to? ................................................................................ 1

3.

The academic misconduct process ................................................................................ 2
Student representation .......................................................................................... 2
Support and reasonable adjustments .................................................................... 2
Staff involvement ................................................................................................... 2
Burden and standard of proof ................................................................................ 3
Category B offences .............................................................................................. 3
Category A offences .............................................................................................. 8
Review .................................................................................................................. 9

4.

The Office of the Independent Adjudicator (OIA) .......................................................... 10

5.

Relevant Documents .................................................................................................... 11

6.

Key contacts ................................................................................................................ 11

1. Introduction
1.1

Academic integrity is the attitude of approaching your academic work honestly, by
completing your own original work, attributing and acknowledging your sources when
necessary. Academic misconduct is conduct which has or may have the effect of
providing you with an unfair advantage by relying on dishonest means to gain
advantage and which therefore compromises your academic integrity. This procedure
sets out the process we will follow, and the penalties we may apply, in cases where
we believe you may have compromised your academic integrity by committing
academic misconduct.

1.2

Academic integrity is all about maintaining standards: of your own work and of your
degree. We do not want you to devalue your own achievement and the work of
others by acting dishonestly in your studies. Plagiarism and cheating reduce the
value of the work you hand in for assessment and ultimately the value of your time
spent at university.
2. Who does this procedure apply to?

2.1

This procedure applies to enrolled students of the University, including staff members
who are enrolled on a course of study with the University. In exceptional
circumstances, the Procedure may apply to graduates of the University, if we are
made aware of evidence that calls into question the academic integrity of your
degree.
1

2.2

If you are on a programme of study covered by the Fitness to Practise Procedure, we
may investigate alleged academic misconduct under the Fitness to Practise
Procedure rather than the Academic Misconduct Procedure.

3. The academic misconduct process
3.1

This procedure aims to provide a quick, simple process with a strong focus on
appropriately qualified staff having the power to deal with concerns as soon as
possible. Outcomes are proportionate to the matters raised.

3.2

The primary aims of this procedure are to support you in maintaining your academic
integrity; to identify cases when your academic integrity has been compromised, and
address them as appropriate; and to help you learn from those cases so that you can
improve your academic practice.

3.3

Student representation

3.3.1

You have the right to take someone with you to academic misconduct meetings. This
may be a student advisor from the Students’ Union or a friend or relative who is not
acting in a legal capacity. The role of this person is to support and advise you. Where
appropriate this person may speak in support of you, but you will usually be expected
to speak for yourself in any meeting or panel hearing.

3.4

Support and reasonable adjustments

3.4.1

We will remind you of the support on offer from the Centre for Academic Success or
an equivalent service (note that from November 2025, CAS will be named Academic
Skills) so that you can take steps to improve your academic practice. In upheld cases
we will require you to attend sessions delivered by CAS / Academic Skills or an
equivalent service as part of the case outcome.

3.4.2

Specific guidance on the use of AI by students has been produced by CAS and is
available through Library and Learning Resources.

3.4.3

If you tell us that you need wellbeing support or the nature of the case means we
think you would benefit from wellbeing support, we will signpost you to appropriate
internal and/or external support services.

3.4.4

If you have a disability and want us to consider making specific reasonable
adjustments to the academic misconduct procedure, you should raise this as soon as
possible during the process. We may need to speak to a Disability Adviser to confirm
what adjustments would be appropriate. Anyone taking part in an academic
misconduct meeting is entitled to ask for a break at any time.

3.5

Staff involvement

3.5.1

With the exception of a first-time Category B offence, where the marker will usually
make a decision and apply a penalty directly, staff making decisions in academic
2

misconduct cases will be impartial and will have had no previous involvement in the
case under consideration. In all cases, we will use suitable alternative staff members
if the individuals named in the procedure are unavailable for any reason e.g. due to
absence or because of a conflict of interest.

3.6

Burden and standard of proof

3.6.1

In all cases of potential academic misconduct, the University is responsible for
determining whether or not misconduct has been committed. Our decisions will be
based on the balance of probabilities i.e. the person or panel making a decision will
accept the explanation that is most likely to be true.

3.7

Category B offences

3.7.1

We recognise that students begin to develop their academic practice at different
stages of their academic journey, and may not be familiar with the expectations of
academic practice at university and / or in the UK. Our aim is to support you in
developing your academic practice, and to help you understand where that practice
has been compromised so that you can avoid repeating your behaviour. This is
particularly the case for Category B offences.

3.7.2

Examples of Category B offences include (but are not limited to):

Plagiarism

Submitting any item of assessment which contains work produced by
someone else in a way which makes it look as though it is your own
work. This includes copying material in any medium (for example,
written work, video, sound recording and so on) and from any source
such as websites, books or journals; or failing to reference the work of
others.

Artificial
intelligence (AI)
misuse

Any use of AI which means you have not independently demonstrated
your own attainment is likely to be seen as academic misconduct. AI
tools must only be used when the assessment instructions permit its
use and where you are able to demonstrate that the final submission
is the product of your own independent work and thinking.
Examples of AI misuse include:
•
•
•

•
•

Copying or paraphrasing sections of AI-generated content so
that the work is no longer your own
Copying or paraphrasing whole responses of AI-generated
content
Using AI to complete parts of the assessment so that the work
does not reflect your own work, analysis, evaluation or
calculations
Failing to acknowledge use of AI tools when they have been
used as a source of information
Incomplete or poor acknowledgement of AI tools

3

Your assignment brief should state whether AI use is Prohibited,
Restricted, Permitted or Required. If it does not, please clarify this
with your module tutor. Please note that AI permissions may vary
between modules, so make sure you check each assignment brief
carefully. If the extent of AI allowed is unclear, you must assume
that you are not permitted to use these tools unless for the early
stages of your work e.g. helping you to structure your work, etc.
Self-plagiarism

This relates to any attempt to gain academic credit for work which you
have previously submitted and which has already gained academic
credit. Self-plagiarism is duplication of material and means
reproducing in any submitted work, a substantial amount of material
you have previously used in other assessed work without
acknowledging that such work has been so submitted.

Collusion

Conspiring with others to reproduce the work of others without proper
acknowledgement, including knowingly permitting work to be copied
by another student.

3.7.3

In all cases, academic staff will apply their expert academic judgment in reaching a
view as to whether a student has or has not compromised their academic integrity.
The OIA defines academic judgment as ‘a judgment that is made about a matter
where only the opinion of an academic expert is sufficient.’

3.7.4

Factors influencing academic judgment in these circumstances include (but are not
limited to):
•

The proportion of the submission that is made up of inappropriate material, where
‘inappropriate’ means material which compromises your academic integrity
(including AI-generated material);

•

The significance of the parts of the submission which contain inappropriate
material;

•

The extent to which inappropriate material, especially AI-generated material, may
be acceptable within the context of the submission and the assessment brief and
/ or other assessment instructions.

3.7.5

We will not usually hold an investigation into Category B offences.

3.7.6

Where an academic staff member believes that you may have compromised your
academic integrity, you may be invited to attend a meeting to discuss your
submission. In cases of potential AI misuse, this is a mandatory step for staff to take.
The meetings should be no more than 15 minutes in length but can be much shorter.
The meeting is informal in nature and does not represent a viva.

3.7.7

If you do not attend a meeting when requested without good reason, it is likely you
will be referred for academic misconduct and your non-attendance will be considered
4

a relevant factor in deciding the level of misconduct should you be referred for a
second Category B offence.
3.7.8

Formal referrals will be made to the Student Governance team and the approach
taken will be determined by whether or not you have any record of previous
academic misconduct offences.

3.7.9

First offences

3.7.9.1 Where Student Governance confirms that you have no previous academic
misconduct on your disciplinary record, the mark you receive for your work will be
based only upon the part of the submission that is your own work.
3.7.9.2 For a first-time Category B offence, the feedback you receive will indicate that your
mark has been reduced to reflect the proportion of work that is your own. The marker
should complete an Academic Misconduct Concerns Form and email it to the
relevant Student Governance inbox (see 6.1 below) with confirmation that your mark
has been adjusted due to a first offence. Academic Misconduct Concerns Forms for
first-time Category B offences do not require consideration or approval by the Deputy
Head of Department or other staff member. Student Governance will record the
offence on the casework system.
3.7.9.3 Within 10 days of receiving your assessment feedback, you will be required to meet
your Personal Tutor or other suitable staff member to discuss your academic
practice. An ‘Academic Misconduct First Offence Form’ must be signed by you and
your Personal Tutor and a copy provided to Student Governance; another copy will
be provided to you to keep. Whether or not you have met with your Personal Tutor
will be considered a relevant factor in deciding the level of misconduct should you be
referred for a second Category B offence.
3.7.9.4
After you have been notified of having committed a Category B first offence,
any further Category B offence will be considered a second offence. Where you are
referred for any further Category B offence before receiving confirmation of having
committed a first offence, the offences will be grouped together and considered as a
single first offence.
3.7.10 Second offences
3.7.10.1
Where you commit a Category B offence for the second time, we will
determine whether the offence represents Minor or Moderate misconduct and apply
the appropriate penalty.
3.7.10.2
Where Student Governance confirms that it is appropriate, an Academic
Misconduct Concerns Form will be completed. The form should give as full an
account as possible of the potential academic misconduct and should provide clear
evidence in support of the referral. Evidence might include, but is not limited to:
•

Your submitted work

5

•
•
•
•
•
•

Work submitted by other students, especially where the allegation(s) relate to
collusion
Turnitin report(s) on content that may be plagiarised
Turnitin report(s) on content that may be AI-generated
Evidence received from third parties, especially where you are alleged to have
arranged for a third party to complete work on your behalf
Invigilator’s statement of behaviour taking place within an exam
Footage of you participating in an online exam, where the allegation relates to
your behaviour within the exam

3.7.10.4
The Academic Misconduct Concerns Form and evidence will be sent to the
Deputy Head of Department (or a suitable member of staff acting as the Deputy
Head of Department’s nominee) or, for doctoral students, an equivalent senior
academic lead in the Doctoral Research College (DRC). The Deputy Head of
Department, or DRC equivalent, will assess the referral and complete the Academic
Misconduct Referral Decision to indicate whether the misconduct appears to be
Minor or Moderate. The Deputy Head of Department, or DRC equivalent, can also
decide that there is no case to answer and that no further action should be taken.
3.7.10.5
Guidance on factors influencing whether misconduct is considered Minor or
Moderate is included below at 3.7.13.
3.7.11 Minor offences
3.7.11.1
Where the Deputy Head of Department, or DRC equivalent, determines that
the misconduct is Minor, the mark you receive for your work will be based only upon
the part of the submission that is your own work. You will be signposted to online
resources that can support the development of your academic practice, and you
must attend a relevant 1:1 tutorial delivered by the Centre for Academic Success (or
an equivalent service). Attendance at a 1:1 tutorial is compulsory in these
circumstances, and you will need to provide confirmation of your attendance at a 1:1
tutorial.
3.7.12 Moderate offences
3.7.12.1
Where the Deputy Head of Department, or DRC equivalent, determines that
the misconduct is Moderate, the mark you receive for your work will be recorded as 0
and, should a further attempt be available under the Academic Regulations, you will
be required to resubmit work for the element of the module in which the misconduct
took place. The resubmitted work will be capped at the pass mark. You will be
signposted to online resources that can support the development of your academic
practice, and you must attend a relevant 1:1 tutorial delivered by the Centre for
Academic Success (or an equivalent service). Attendance at a 1:1 tutorial is
compulsory in these circumstances, and you will need to provide confirmation of your
attendance at a 1:1 tutorial. If you do not attend the 1:1 tutorial and are later found to
have committed academic misconduct again, your failure to attend the tutorial will be
taken into account in deciding the later penalty and is likely to be considered an
aggravating factor.

6

3.7.13 Factors influencing the classification of misconduct as Minor or Moderate
3.7.13.1
Classification of a second offence as Minor or Moderate is a matter of
academic judgment and should take into account all the available evidence and
circumstances of the case. The following are some of the relevant factors when
determining the classification of academic misconduct:
•

•
•

•
•

How far advanced you are in your studies and to what extent you have had
the opportunity to develop your academic practice. Academic misconduct by
students at a lower level of study and/or with less opportunity to develop their
academic practice will usually be categorised at the lower level, depending on
other relevant factors;
What proportion of the submitted work relates to the potential academic
misconduct;
Whether you have engaged with support for your academic practice e.g.
whether you have met with your Personal Tutor and completed an Academic
Misconduct First Offence Form, or whether you have attended a relevant
academic practice tutorial;
Evidence of a plan to commit academic misconduct and / or gain an unfair
advantage;
What the specific effect of the recommended outcome would be on you, e.g.
would it lead to withdrawal or prevent you from trailing credits into the
following academic year?

3.7.14 Third offences
3.7.14.1
In any case where a third offence of Category B misconduct is suspected, the
misconduct will be considered Major and the case will be referred to a University
Disciplinary Panel. Such panels are governed by the University’s Panel Guidance.
3.7.14.2
Student Governance will make the panel arrangements and will invite you to
submit any evidence you wish to be considered by the panel. You will be invited to
attend the panel hearing.
3.7.14.3
A University Disciplinary Panel can issue any decision that does not
compromise the Academic Regulations. The focus of University Disciplinary Panels
is to reach decisions that reflect the nature of the misconduct committed and which
are proportionate and appropriate. University Disciplinary Panels are empowered to
withdraw you. Where you are withdrawn, you will be entitled to retain any academic
credits achieved unless there is clear and compelling evidence to demonstrate that
the credits should be removed because they have been achieved through academic
misconduct.
3.7.15 Appeals
3.7.15.1
If you wish to appeal against the penalty applied as a result of a first- or
second-time Category B offence, you should complete an Academic Misconduct
7

Appeal Form (First or Second Category B) and send it via email to the Student
Governance team. A blank copy of the Form will be given to you at the point you are
informed of the initial misconduct outcome.
3.7.15.2
Appeals should be made within 10 working days of you attending a meeting
with your Personal Tutor (for first-time offences: see 3.7.9) or a 1:1 tutorial with the
Centre for Academic Success or equivalent service (for second-time offences: see
3.7.10). Appeals made outside this timeframe may be deemed ineligible. In deciding
eligibility, we will take into account circumstances where you may have attempted to
attend a meeting or tutorial but have been unable to do so due to circumstances
outside of your control.
3.7.15.3
Student Governance will pass the appeal on to the relevant Head of
Department. The Head of Department will consider your appeal and provide you with
a decision by way of email response via the Student Governance team.
3.7.15.4
If you wish to challenge the Head of Department’s decision, you should follow
the Review stage of the process (see 3.9 below).
3.8

Category A offences

3.8.1

We distinguish Category A offences from Category B offences because they are not
associated with the development of your academic practice. As such, all Category A
offences are considered Major misconduct.

3.8.2

Examples of Category A offences include (but are not limited to):

Category A
Exam cheating

This includes trying to access exam contents or trying to obtain
confidential information about exam contents before the exam;
copying or trying to copy from someone else during an exam;
communicating or trying to communicate with another person during
an exam, including other students and third parties; trying to get
someone else to take the exam for you; and breaking exam rules in
any way e.g. having notes or electronic devices that are not allowed,
or accessing online information when it is not allowed.

False
presentation

A specific form of plagiarism where you arrange for someone else to
complete work on your behalf and then submit it as your own. This
includes circumstances where you pay someone else to produce
work for you or purchase work produced by someone else in any way
(this is often referred to as ‘contract cheating’).

Personation

This is a form of cheating when you permit another individual to
assume your identity with the intent to deceive and gain advantage
during an examination.

Violation of
research or

This includes falsifying information, resources or data by making up
research responses; inventing or changing someone else’s work to fit
8

professional
ethics

your assessment or theory; forging a signature on an assessment
document or failing to secure the necessary permissions before
carrying out research.

3.8.3

For all Category A offences, an Academic Misconduct Concerns Form will be
completed. The form should give as full an account as possible of the potential
academic misconduct and should provide clear evidence in support of the referral.

3.8.4

The Academic Misconduct Concerns Form and evidence will be submitted to Student
Governance, who will send it to the Head of Department (or a suitable member of
staff acting as the Head of Department’s nominee), or DRC equivalent. The Head of
Department, or DRC equivalent, will assess the referral and may decide that there is
no case to answer and that no further action should be taken. Where the Head of
Department decides that there is a case to answer, the case will proceed to a
University Disciplinary Panel. Such panels are governed by the University’s Panel
Guidance.

3.8.5

Student Governance will make the panel arrangements and will invite you to submit
any evidence you wish to be considered by the panel. You will be invited to attend
the panel hearing.

3.8.6

A University Disciplinary Panel can issue any decision that does not compromise the
Academic Regulations. The focus of University Disciplinary Panels is to reach
decisions that reflect the nature of the misconduct committed and which are
proportionate and appropriate. Examples of potential decisions made by a University
Disciplinary Panel include:
•
•
•
•

3.8.8

No case to answer;
All of the penalties applicable to Category B offences;
Withdrawal from your course of study, with achieved academic credit
retained;
Withdrawal from your course of study, with achieved academic credit
removed. Academic credit will only be removed in exceptional circumstances
and where there is clear and compelling evidence to demonstrate that the
credits should be removed because they have been achieved through
academic misconduct.

Appeals

3.8.8.1 If you wish to appeal against the decision reached by a University Disciplinary Panel,
you should use the Review stage of this Procedure – see 3.9 below.
3.9

Review

3.9.1

If you are not satisfied with the outcome of the case, you can request a review. There
are limited grounds for asking for a review, which are as follows:

9

•

•
•

There is new evidence which you were unable, for valid reasons, to provide
earlier in the process that would have had a significant effect on the outcome
of the case;
The correct procedure was not followed during the case and this has had a
significant effect on the outcome;
The outcome was unreasonable given all the circumstances and the evidence
considered.

3.9.2

At the review stage, we will not usually consider the issues again or investigate the
matter further. A case outcome must have been issued before it can move to the
review stage.

3.9.3

Review requests should be submitted to the Student Governance team using the
relevant review request form. You must set out your grounds clearly and briefly, and
provide evidence, where possible, of the issues raised. If you do not provide
evidence when submitting your form then we may ask you to provide the evidence
and give you a time limit to do so; the review may be paused while we await your
evidence.

3.9.4

You should submit any review request within 15 working days of being sent the
decision of the Head of Department or University Panel. Where you submit a review
request beyond this timeframe, you will need to include an explanation and evidence
to demonstrate that you could not reasonably have submitted your review request
sooner. Review requests submitted more than 15 working days after the relevant
decision may be deemed ineligible due to being unreasonably delayed.

3.9.5

The Assistant Director Student and Academic Services – Student Services, or
another staff member acting as nominee of the Assistant Director, will decide
between the following outcomes:
•
•

•

There are no grounds for taking the matter further; or
The case will be referred back to the previous stage with a recommendation.
Where a matter is referred back to the previous stage, the timescales
applying to that stage will begin again; or
The issues are complicated and so it would be better to deal with them
through a review panel. A review panel will be held in line with our standard
procedures for such panels.

3.9.6

The reviewer will have had no prior involvement in your case. The review decision
will be sent to you as a formal decision along with guidance on any relevant next
steps.

3.9.7

The review decision will be sent to you within 15 working days of your review request
being received.

4
4.1

The Office of the Independent Adjudicator (OIA)
Where your review request is not upheld, we will issue you with a Completion of
Procedures letter (a CoP) and tell you about your right to make a complaint to the

10

OIA. You will have 12 months from the date of the CoP to make a complaint to the
OIA.
4.2

The OIA look at whether the University applied its regulations properly and followed
its procedures correctly, and consider whether any decision made by the University
was fair and reasonable in all the circumstances. The OIA reviews cases but does
not re-investigate them.

4.3

The OIA normally expects students to follow the University’s internal procedures to
their conclusion before complaining to the OIA. If you make a complaint to the OIA
without having a CoP, your complaint is likely to be deemed ineligible.

5

Relevant Documents

5.1

The Academic Misconduct Referral Form, Academic Misconduct Review Request
Form and information about support for academic integrity and academic misconduct
can be found the Academic Misconduct Procedure page on iCity.

5.2

Specific guidance on the use of AI by students has been produced by CAS and is
available through Library and Learning Resources.

5.3

The Guiding Principles of Casework Procedures are also available on iCity.

5.4

The University’s Academic Regulations can be found on the University’s external
website.

6
6.1

Key contacts
Student Governance contact addresses are as follows:
• ADM.StudentGovernance@bcu.ac.uk
• BLSS.StudentGovernance@bcu.ac.uk
• CEBE.StudentGovernance@bcu.ac.uk
• HELS.StudentGovernance@bcu.ac.uk

Document Control Statement
Document Type
Document Owner
Division / Service
Version
Document Status
Approved by
Date of
Publication
Related
Documents

Academic Misconduct Procedure
Assistant Director Student Services
Student Services
2
Approved
LTAQC
Date
02/09/2025
15/09/2025
Next Review 01/03/2026
Date
Please see section 5 of the Procedure above

11

Appendix 1: Table of indicative penalties
Type of
Academic
Misconduct
Category B
1st Offence
Work is marked but marks
only awarded for original
content of work

Classification of Misconduct
Minor

Moderate

For doctoral students,
progression decisions are
made only by reference to
the original content of the
work

2nd Offence

Signposting to support
resources; voluntary
attendance at academic
practice workshop
Work is marked but marks
only awarded for original
content of work

Work is awarded a mark of 0.
Capped resit attempt where
available under the Academic
Regulations

For doctoral students,
progression decisions are
made only by reference to the
original content of the work

For doctoral students, a
progression decision of ‘not
proceed’ is made

Signposting to support
resources; compulsory
attendance at academic
practice workshop

Signposting to support
resources; compulsory
attendance at academic
practice workshop

12

Major

3rd Offence

Referral to University
Disciplinary Panel.
Penalty proportionate and
appropriate in line with the
misconduct committed.
Exclusion of up to 5 years, with
or without academic credit
gained, is possible

Category A

13
