Academic Misconduct Procedures
Approved by:
Education Committee

Effective date:
1 August 2025

Next review:
31 July 2027

Academic Misconduct Procedures
The Academic Misconduct Procedures outlines the University’s approach to considering allegations of
academic misconduct. The Procedures apply to all modes of assessment and all students (undergraduate
and postgraduate). This Procedure outlines the steps the University (and its Partners) will take to investigate
allegations of academic misconduct at the University, explains the stages of the procedural process and the
potential outcomes at each stage.

Who needs to know about the procedure?
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

School Leadership Team
Heads of Subject
Course Directors
Module Leaders
Personal Academic Tutors (PAT)
Staff with Partnership responsibility
All teaching staff
Student and Academic Services staff
Students

Purpose of the Academic Misconduct Procedure
The Academic Misconduct Procedures outline the University’s approach to considering alleged breaches of
Schedule 2: Categories and Sanctions. This Procedure informs students, staff and the Student’s Union of
the stages within the Procedure, the potential penalties and the options available to students to respond to
an allegation of academic misconduct including submitting a complaint to the Office of the Independent
Adjudicator of Higher Education (OIA) following the completion of our internal procedure, also known as the
Completion of Procedures (CoP).

1

Academic Misconduct Procedures
Contacts
The Student Governance Team within Academic Registry is responsible for:
•
•
•
•
•
•

Monitoring implementation of the Procedure across the University
Procedural advice.
Academic Misconduct Administration
Providing templates for enacting the Procedure.
Procedural training.
Institutional level annual reporting.

The Student Governance Team can be contacted by emailing: academicmisconduct@canterbury.ac.uk
The Education and Student Success team is responsible for:
•
•
•

Academic Integrity Policy.
Providing advice and assistance on academic practices and assessment design.
Delivering training on academic practices.

The Education and Student Success Team can be contacted by emailing:
educationandstudentsuccess@canterbury.ac.uk
Schools are responsible for:
•
•
•

Conducting investigations and decision making associated with the Procedure.
Establishing Academic Integrity Officers
Academic staff resources to enact decision making under this Procedure.

The Students’ Union is responsible for:
•

Providing independent support, advice, and advocacy for students at the University’s home
campuses through the Students’ Union Advice Centre. The Students’ Union Advice Centre can be
contacted by emailing: advice@ccsu.co.uk.

The Student Governance Team is responsible for the operation and management of the Academic Misconduct
Procedures.

2

Academic Misconduct Procedures

Contents
Part 1 – General Provisions ........................................................................................................................................... 4
1.

Introduction ............................................................................................................................................................. 4

2.

Scope of the Procedure ........................................................................................................................................ 4

3.

Early Resolution..................................................................................................................................................... 5

Part 2 – The Procedures ................................................................................................................................................ 6
4.

Initiating Academic Misconduct ........................................................................................................................... 6

5.

Stage 1 Academic Misconduct ............................................................................................................................ 9

Minor and Moderate Academic Misconduct................................................................................................................. 9
Major Academic Misconduct and Academic Misconduct Panel .............................................................................. 11
First Offence of Academic Misconduct ....................................................................................................................... 13
Previous Substantiated Academic Misconduct ......................................................................................................... 14
Mitigating Factors and Reasonable Adjustments...................................................................................................... 14
6.

Stage 2 Academic Misconduct Appeal ............................................................................................................. 15

7.

Office of the Independent Adjudicator of Higher Education (OIA) ................................................................ 16

8.

Records, Monitoring and Confidentiality. ......................................................................................................... 16

Part 3 – Schedules ........................................................................................................................................................ 18
Schedule 1: Definitions of Types of Academic Misconduct ..................................................................................... 18
Schedule 2: Categories and Sanctions ...................................................................................................................... 20

3

Academic Misconduct Procedures
Part 1 – General Provisions
1. Introduction
1.1.

This Procedure outlines how the University will consider allegations of Academic Misconduct and
breaches of the principles outlined in the Academic Integrity Policy. The Procedure should be read
in conjunction with the Academic Integrity Policy.

1.2.

For the purpose of this Procedure, the term ‘Academic Misconduct’ includes all breaches of integrity
(e.g., examination misconduct, contract cheating, plagiarism, duplication and collusion). This
Procedure outlines definitions of types of academic misconduct, contained in Schedule 1, defines
what may constitute Minor, Moderate and Major forms of academic misconduct and the possible
sanctions associated with each level and category, contained in Schedule 2 of this Procedure.

1.3.

All students should familiarise themselves with the academic conventions and practices applicable
to their course of study.

1.4.

The standard of proof to be adopted when considering allegations of academic misconduct is on
the balance of probabilities. An allegation of academic misconduct shall only be substantiated
where it is more likely than not that academic misconduct has occurred.

1.5.

For the purpose of this Procedure, the burden of proof principally rests with the University to prove
that the student or former student of the University has, on the balance of probabilities, breached
the principles set out in the Academic Integrity Policy and Schedule 2 of this Procedure.

1.6.

Where it has been established that work has been submitted that may not be a breach of the
definitions of academic misconduct, but it may be considered as Poor Academic Practice (PAP),
the University allows for the opportunity for students to receive guidance on what constitutes poor
academic practice, including but not limited to, referencing conventions and study skills.

2. Scope of the Procedure
2.1.

This Procedure applies to.
2.1.1. All current and former students registered with the University.
2.1.2. Where a student has withdrawn from their studies, this Procedure can be initiated for a period
of 20 working days from the assessment or reassessment submission deadline that the
allegation of academic misconduct may relate to.
2.1.3. Both undergraduate and postgraduate courses of study, including both taught and
research postgraduate courses of study.

4

Academic Misconduct Procedures
2.1.4. All forms of assessment, including but not limited to coursework, examinations, group
assessment, research and/or any work submitted for what is considered to be a formal,
summative assessment. This Procedure does not apply to draft or formative submissions.
2.1.5. First or subsequent (re)submission attempts of any assessment.
2.2.

The University’s Partner Institutions are required to follow Procedures consonant with this
Procedure when considering allegation(s) of academic misconduct.
2.2.1. Where the University’s Partner Institution is a member of the Office of the Independent
Adjudicator for Higher Education (OIA) scheme, the Partner Institution shall complete all stages
of this Procedure (or their equivalent) where relevant, and the student shall be issued with a
Completion of Procedures (CoP) letter by the Partner Institution.
2.2.2. Where the University’s Partner Institution is not a member of the Office of the Independent
Adjudicator for Higher Education’s (OIAHE) scheme, the Partner Institution shall complete
Stage 1 of this Procedure (or their equivalent). The student will have the option of submitting a
Stage 2 Academic Misconduct Appeal to the University, Canterbury Christ Church University.
2.2.3. In such circumstances, the University will request the relevant case file from the Partner
Institution and will be considered under Section 6 of this Procedure.

2.3.

Where an allegation is made relating to a student on a course which may lead to eligibility (or
contributing towards eligibility) to apply for or achieve registration with a professional, statutory
and/or regulatory body (or students registered with such a body), the University may:
2.3.1. Refer a substantiated case of academic misconduct to the Fitness to Practise Procedures to
assess any implications regarding the student's ability to meet the professional standards
required.

2.4.

The sanctions contained in Schedule 2 in this Procedure may be applied where academic
misconduct has been substantiated for a former student who has completed their studies, and a
final award has been conferred. As in paragraph 2.3, the University may be required to notify the
relevant regulatory body in such cases.

3. Early Resolution
3.1.

This Procedure acknowledges that at the early stages of a student’s academic journey,
proficiency in academic writing and/or conventions are still being developed and instances of
Poor Academic Practice (PAP) may occur as defined in Schedule 1 of this Procedure.

3.2.

Where Poor Academic Practice (PAP) has been identified, and the Poor Academic Practice
does not constitute a potential breach of the categories of academic misconduct contained
in Schedule 2, this procedure allows for concerns to be resolved by way of Early Resolution
without the need for action under Part 2 of this Procedure.

5

Academic Misconduct Procedures
3.3.

Where Poor Academic Practice (PAP) has been identified, the student can have the opportunity
to meet with a relevant member of academic staff, such as their Personal Academic Tutor
(PAT), to develop their academic skills. They may also be referred to the University’s Learning
Skills Hub (or equivalent within a Partner Institution) to access appropriate learning modules
and/or academic skills resources, where relevant.

3.4.

Where Poor Academic Practice has been identified, the marker shall reflect any Poor Academic
Practice (PAP) that may have taken place in the marking process. If established, the item of
work can fail on pedagogic grounds.

Part 2 – The Procedures
4. Initiating Academic Misconduct
4.1.

Each School (or relevant department) shall establish Academic Integrity Officers.

4.2.

Where a marker, module leader or invigilator suspects academic misconduct may have
occurred, they should refer the case to an Academic Integrity Officer of the School (or relevant
department) responsible for the module concerned for an initial assessment within 5 working
days of identifying the suspicion of academic misconduct.

4.3.

Where a referral has been made, no provisional mark or feedback should be returned to the
student(s) for the assessment in question.

4.4.

Where a referral is made to an Academic Integrity Officer for an initial assessment, all relevant
information and evidence that gave rise to the initial suspicion should be made available. This
may include, but is not limited to:
4.4.1. Turnitin reports.
4.4.2. Statement from invigilators/incident reports.
4.4.3. Examinations booklets.
4.4.4. Academic judgement.

4.5.

Where the University is made aware of a potential allegation of academic misconduct from any
person(s) outside of the University, the most appropriate member of internal academic staff can
refer the matter to the Academic Integrity Officer for consideration in accordance with paragraphs
4.2 and 4.4. In such instances, details of the case or outcome will not be provided to the external
notifying party.

4.6.

Where a student at the University suspects a fellow student may have committed potential
academic misconduct, they can disclose the matter to an appropriate member of academic staff,
who can refer the case to the Academic Integrity Officer in accordance paragraphs 4.2 and 4.4.
In such instances, details of the case or outcome will not be provided to the notifying student.
6

Academic Misconduct Procedures
4.6.1. Where the notifying student does not wish to disclose their identity, there may be limited
action the University can take in response.
4.7.

The Academic Integrity Officer shall review the information provided by the marker, module leader
or invigilator and determine whether the case should be referred to Stage 1 of the Academic
Misconduct Procedure. It is expected that their initial assessment shall be completed within 5
working days of receiving the referral.

4.8.

Where the Academic Integrity Officer determines that, based on the information and evidence
provided, Stage 1 of this Procedure is not required, the case shall be referred back to the staff
member raising the concern and they will be advised to mark the work and no further action will be
taken under this Procedure.
4.8.1. Where Poor Academic Practice (PAP) has been identified, the student(s) will be provided
with any relevant feedback to assist with academic development as per paragraph 3.3.

4.9.

Where the Academic Integrity Officer determines that the case should be referred to Stage 1
of this Procedure, they must complete a Stage 1 Academic Misconduct Allegation Report form
and submit the form.

4.10. A Stage 1 Academic Misconduct Allegation Report form must include the following:
4.10.1. Details of the student(s) and student number(s) to whom it relates to;
4.10.2. The facts on which the allegation has been made, accompanied by all the relevant evidence.
4.10.3. The category of academic misconduct that is considered to be in breach;
4.10.4. Details of the assessment, including copies of the coursework or examination the allegation
relates to and any information provided to students on the course concerning academic
conventions and practices.
4.10.5. All relevant supporting evidence from similarity or detection tools that are endorsed by the
University.

7

Academic Misconduct Procedures

4.11. The determination that Stage 1 of this Procedure should be initiated does not represent a
decision that a breach of academic misconduct has occurred.
4.12. Academic Misconduct proceedings can only be initiated by way of submitting a formal Stage 1
Academic Misconduct Allegation Report form. It is expected that a Stage 1 Academic
Misconduct Allegation Report form shall be submitted within 30 working days from the
assessment or reassessment submission deadline.
4.13. The University reserves the right to initiate this procedure in respect of academic misconduct
that comes to light after an assessment has been marked, a final grade awarded, or an award
conferred, where there are reasonable grounds to believe that academic misconduct may have
occurred.
4.14. The procedure can be initiated under the following circumstances (non-exhaustive list):
4.14.1. The discovery of new or previously unavailable evidence;
4.14.2. Concerns raised by third parties, or other Universities.
4.15. In such cases, the Director of Student Governance shall make the final determination by
considering the following principles:
4.15.1. Upholding the integrity and credibility of the University, in their qualifications and academic
standards.
4.15.2.The severity of the type of academic misconduct and the number of assessments it relates
to.
4.15.3. The reputational risk to the University in not considering a retrospective allegation of
academic misconduct.
4.15.4. The length of time that has lapsed and if a fair investigation could be carried out inline with
the principles of natural justice, i.e. the right to respond.
4.15.5. Consideration of obligations of external and regulatory requirements.
4.16. Where a decision is made by the Director of Student Governance that the retrospective
allegation can be initiated, the allegation will be referred to the relevant Academic Integrity
Officer to initiate an allegation.

8

Academic Misconduct Procedures

5. Stage 1 Academic Misconduct
Minor and Moderate Academic Misconduct
5.1.

The School shall appoint an Investigating Officer to consider the case.

5.2.

The Student Governance Team shall notify the student that is subject to the academic
misconduct investigation within 10 working days of raising the Stage 1 Academic Misconduct
Allegation Report form.

5.3.

The written notification to the student shall include the following:
5.3.1. The allegation and any relevant evidence that is being considered as part of the academic
misconduct investigation,
5.3.2. The likely penalties that may be applied under Schedule 2,
5.3.3. A copy of the Academic Misconduct Procedures,
5.3.4. Options available to the student to respond to the allegation and any timeframes that
should be adhered to,
5.3.5. Information relating to relevant student support departments and the Student’s Union.

5.4.

Where a student has been notified of an allegation of Academic Misconduct, they will be
invited to respond to the allegation and provide written representations which may include
the following:
5.4.1. Dispute the allegation
5.4.2. Accept the allegation, and/or
5.4.3. Provide evidence to be considered by the Investigating Officer.

5.5.

Where a student does not respond to the allegation and chooses not to provide written
representations for consideration, the Investigation will proceed on the information and evidence
available, and the student will be provided with a decision and outcome within 15 working days
of the deadline provided to the student for option of submission of written representations.

5.6.

The Investigation Officer can determine one of the following decisions:
5.6.1. The allegation is unsubstantiated, that is, based on the evidence available, no academic
misconduct has been proven to have occurred on the balance of probabilities.

9

Academic Misconduct Procedures

5.6.2. The allegation is substantiated, that is, on the balance of probabilities, a Minor or
Moderate Academic Misconduct has occurred and apply a permissible sanction
contained in Schedule 2.
5.6.3. The case may represent Major Academic Misconduct, that is, the available evidence
demonstrates the case could be considered as Major Academic Misconduct, and it will be
referred to an Academic Misconduct Panel. An Investigation Officer cannot substantiate a
case as Major Academic Misconduct, this can only be carried out by a Panel.
5.7.

Where a student does not respond to the allegation and chooses not to provide written
representations for consideration, the Investigation will proceed on the information and evidence
available, and the student will be provided with a decision and outcome within 15 working days
of the deadline provided to the student for option of submission of written representations.

5.8.

The Investigation Officer can determine one of the following decisions:
5.8.1. The allegation is unsubstantiated, that is, based on the evidence available, no academic
misconduct has been proven to have occurred on the balance of probabilities.
5.8.2. The allegation is substantiated, that is, on the balance of probabilities, a Minor or
Moderate Academic Misconduct has occurred and apply a permissible sanction
contained in Schedule 2.
5.8.3. The case may represent Major Academic Misconduct, that is, the available evidence
demonstrates the case could be considered as Major Academic Misconduct, and it will be
referred to an Academic Misconduct Panel. An Investigating Officer cannot substantiate a
case as Major Academic Misconduct, this can only be carried out by a Panel.

5.9.

The Investigating Officer shall inform the Student Governance Team of their decision and
outcome.

5.10. Where the academic misconduct allegation has been unsubstantiated under paragraph 5.6.1,
the marker will be informed of the outcome and advised to mark the work and where relevant,
reflect any Poor Academic Practice (PAP) that may have taken place in the reduced mark. If
established, the item of work can fail on pedagogic grounds.
5.11. The Student Governance Team shall notify the student of the outcome within 15 working days of
the submission of written representations, or the deadline date provided to the student for the
option of submission of written representations. Where paragraph 5.6.3 applies, the student
should be notified of the next steps.

10

Academic Misconduct Procedures

Major Academic Misconduct and Academic Misconduct Panel
5.12. Where potential Major Academic Misconduct is identified, the School shall appoint an
Investigating Officer to conduct any background investigation or information gathering that needs
to take place ahead of a Major Academic Misconduct Panel.
5.13. Following initial consideration from the Investigation Officer and where the relevant information
gathering that has taken place, the Student Governance Team will establish an Academic
Misconduct Panel.
5.14. The indicative Panel composition under this Procedure, shall comprise of the following:
5.14.1.One Senior Member of academic staff, to act as Chair of the Panel
5.14.2.Two academic members of staff
5.15. In respect of any Panel that takes place under this Procedure, it is expected that the Panel
members will usually be located within the School responsible for the course in question. The
Panel members shall not have had any prior involvement in the assessment(s) in question or in
raising and/or investigating the suspicion of alleged Academic Misconduct.
5.16. A member of the Student Governance Team will act as a clerk to the Panel.
5.17. The Student Governance Team shall notify the student subject to the academic misconduct
allegation within 10 working days’ of raising the Stage 1 Academic Misconduct allegation report
form or a referral from the decision by the Investigating officer pursuant to paragraph 5.6.3.
5.18. The Student Governance Team shall notify the student with an invitation letter to attend the
Academic Misconduct Panel Hearing in person or via Microsoft (MS) Teams. The student
shall be provided with the following:
5.18.1.Date, time and location of the Panel.
5.18.2.Names and job titles of the Panel members.
5.18.3.Any witnesses the Chair of the Panel intends to call.
5.18.4.The allegation and any relevant evidence that is being considered by the Panel;
5.18.5.The likely sanction that may be applied under Schedule 2 of this Procedure;
5.18.6.Options available to the student to respond to the allegation and the relevant
timeframes that should be adhered to, should the student wish to respond to the

11

Academic Misconduct Procedures

allegation by way of written representations.
5.18.7.A copy of the Academic Misconduct Procedures.
5.19. In respect of any Panel that takes place under this Procedure, the student shall be provided with
at least 5 working days’ notice.
5.20. Where the student does not wish to attend the Panel Hearing, they will be provided with the
opportunity to submit written representations for consideration by the Panel. Where the student
does not wish to attend the Panel or submit written representations, the Panel may make a
decision in the student’s absence, provided that the Chair of the Panel is satisfied that the
student was informed of the date of hearing with the relevant timeframe stated in paragraph 5.17
has been adhered to.
5.21. The Chair of the Panel can postpone the Panel Hearing on one occasion at the request of the
student in exceptional circumstances. This may include:
5.21.1.The proposed date and/or time conflicts with a pre-existing exam or assessment requirement.
5.21.2.The proposed date and/or time conflicts with a medical appointment that can be
evidenced by the student.
5.22. Where a student attends a Panel Hearing, they have the right to be accompanied by a “Friend”
should they wish to do so. A “Friend” will normally be a fellow student of the University, a
member of the Student’s Union, or a member of staff of the University (or Partner Institution).
The student will be responsible for arranging the Friend’s attendance at the Panel Hearing and
confirming the details of the “Friend” that they intend to be accompanied by with no less than 2
working days’ notice of the date of the intended Academic Misconduct Panel Hearing.
5.23. It is expected that the Friend will not be any person that is involved in the allegation, in
identifying the alleged academic misconduct, or a fellow student who is also subject to
academic misconduct that may be linked to the allegation that is being investigated.
5.24. The Chair of the Panel can refuse the attendance of the “Friend”, should they have reason to
believe that paragraph 5.21 and/or paragraph 5.22 applies.
5.25. The Chair may permit the “Friend” to speak on behalf of the student subject to the academic
misconduct allegation if doing so would assist the Panel Hearing. The student is responsible for
arranging the “Friend’s” attendance at the Panel Hearing.
5.26. It is not usually permitted to be represented by a legally qualified solicitor or barrister,
however the University may allow legal representation at an Academic Misconduct Panel in
exceptional circumstances, such as where the academic misconduct may result in a

12

Academic Misconduct Procedures

sanction that could affect the student’s registration at the University, in the interest of
fairness or where the consequences for the student may result in a conferred aware being
revoked retrospectively and/or where it may lead to preventing a student practicing in a
regulated profession.
5.27. The Panel Hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the directions of the Chair of the
Panel, who may also determine the order of proceedings. Such directions may include:
5.27.1.Hearing of related allegations relating to two or more students at the same hearing;
5.27.2.Adjourning the hearing to another time or place; and/or
5.27.3.May ask questions of the student and/or witnesses.
5.28. The Panel shall deliberate in private, following the Panel Hearing and reach its decision by
majority vote. In the event of a split decision, the Chair of the Panel shall have the casting vote
if there is no majority decision.
5.29. In respect of a Panel convened under this Procedure, once concluded and all evidence
has been considered by the Panel members at the Hearing, the Panel shall determine
one of the following outcomes:
5.29.1.The allegation is unsubstantiated. i.e. that, based on the evidence available, no academic
misconduct has been proven (on the balance of probabilities) to have occurred.
5.29.2.The allegation is substantiated. i.e. that the evidence available demonstrates it is more
likely than not that the alleged academic misconduct has occurred and therefore the case
has been proven, and one or more of the sanctions set out in Schedule 2 is applied, as
appropriate to the case.
5.30. A written record of the Panel Hearing will be taken and shared with the student with their
Stage 1 Academic Misconduct outcome.
5.31. It is expected that Stage 1 of this Procedure will usually take place within 35 working days
of a duly completed Stage 1 Allegation of Academic Misconduct Report form.

First Offence of Academic Misconduct
5.32. Minor Academic Misconduct: For the purposes of this Procedure, where a first case of Minor
academic misconduct is substantiated, the sanction that will be applied will be a Formal
Reprimand which will be retained in the student’s record for the duration of their course of study.
5.33. Where a student subsequently has an allegation of Minor academic misconduct substantiated

13

Academic Misconduct Procedures

after application of the Formal Reprimand, they will then be subject to higher sanction as
outlined in Schedule 2, appropriate to the relevant misconduct category.
5.34. Moderate or Major Academic Misconduct: First substantiated cases of academic
misconduct that is Moderate or Major will be subject to the sanction(s) outlined in Schedule 2,
appropriate to the relevant misconduct category.

Previous Substantiated Academic Misconduct
5.35. A previously substantiated case of academic misconduct that has occurred in a previous
academic year, or a different semester or trimester of the same academic year shall be taken
into consideration when determining the appropriate sanction for any future substantiated case of
academic misconduct.
5.35.1. A previously substantiated case of academic misconduct occurring in the same
semester or trimester, shall not be considered for the purposes of this Procedure in the
application of the sanctions contained in Schedule 2.
5.36. It is expected that there is a progressive increase in the potential sanctions applied under this
Procedure, that is, the sanction to be applied where there is a previous substantiated case of
academic misconduct, will usually be equivalent to, or of a higher level than the most recent
substantiated case of academic misconduct.

Mitigating Factors and Reasonable Adjustments
5.37. The University will make reasonable adjustments and anticipatory reasonable adjustments to
arrangements under this Procedure where a student has disclosed a disability or is in the
process of obtaining a diagnosis for a health condition requiring a reasonable adjustment. In
such cases, the University shall refer to the Learning Support Plan (LSP) or Interim Learning
Support Plan (ILSP) to consider what is reasonable. This may include, but not limited to,
varying the mode of attendance at a meeting or Panel Hearing to enable the student to
respond to the academic misconduct allegation.
5.38. Mitigating factors are not usually considered as a reason for why the academic misconduct took
place or as part of a consideration under this Procedure. The University has provisions and
resources available to support students experiencing difficulty through the Exceptional
Circumstances Procedure. Students are expected to make use of this and/or any other
provision available to the student and therefore, mitigating factors will not usually be considered
under this Procedure.

14

Academic Misconduct Procedures

6. Stage 2 Academic Misconduct Appeal
6.1.

A student who has received a substantiated decision and associated sanction under Stage 1
of this Procedure may submit a Stage 2 Academic Misconduct Appeal form if they wish to
appeal the outcome and/or the sanction applied.

6.2.

A Stage 2 Academic Misconduct Appeal can only be made by way of submitting a Stage 2
Academic Misconduct Appeal form.

6.3.

The Stage 2 Academic Misconduct Appeal form shall be submitted within 10 working days of the
date the student was notified of the outcome and/or sanction applied at Stage 1. Where the
student submits a Stage 2 Academic Misconduct appeal form outside of the 10 working days
timeframe stipulated in this Procedure, it will not usually be considered and will be deemed
invalid unless there is good reason for the delay and is accompanied by supporting evidence for
the delay.

6.4.

A Stage 2 Academic Misconduct appeal may only be made on one or more of the following
ground(s):
6.4.1. There has been a demonstrable procedural error or irregularity that occurred resulting in
substantial unfairness to the student; and/or
6.4.2. There is new material evidence that could not reasonably have been provided during
Stage 1, and which would have had a material influence on the outcome and/or the
sanction applied; and/or
6.4.3. The sanction applied is manifestly disproportionate and/or not permitted under the Procedures.

6.5.

Where a Stage 2 Academic Misconduct Appeal form has been submitted, the case shall be
referred to a Associate Dean, Education (or nominee) for consideration. It is expected that the
Associate Dean, Education (or nominee) will not have any prior involvement in the case.

6.6.

The Associate Dean, Education (or nominee) shall consider the appeal on the basis of the written
appeal papers and the information and/or evidence provided by the student.

6.7.

After considering the Stage 2 Academic Misconduct Appeal, the Associate Dean, Education (or
nominee) may:
6.7.1. Reject the appeal and uphold the original decision and sanction applied; or
6.7.2. Uphold the appeal and provide a new decision and/or sanction; or

15

Academic Misconduct Procedures

6.7.3. Partially uphold the appeal and provide a new decision and/or sanction.
6.8.

The student can expect to receive their Stage 2 Academic Misconduct Appeal outcome usually
within a total of 15 working days of submitting their completed Stage 2 Academic Misconduct
Appeal form.

6.9.

After receiving their Stage 2 Academic Misconduct Appeal outcome, the student has completed the
University’s internal procedure and can submit a complaint to the Office of the Independent
Adjudicator (OIA) for Higher Education, should they remain dissatisfied with the outcome.

6.10. The University shall endeavor to provide an outcome associated with Stage 1 and Stage 2
within the procedural timeframes contained within this procedure. Where the student is subject
to an allegation of academic misconduct and is awaiting a decision either at Stage 1 or Stage 2
of this Procedure, the most recent Board of Examiners decision stands regarding progression
decisions.

7. Office of the Independent Adjudicator of Higher Education (OIA)
7.1.

The Stage 2 Academic Misconduct Appeal outcome represents the final decision of the
University. At this point, students have completed the University’s internal Procedures, following
which, the University will issue a Completion of Procedures (CoP) letter. Details on next steps
and submitting a Complaint to the Office of the Independent Adjudicator (OIA) will be provided.
A complaint must be submitted to the OIA within 12 months of the date of the Stage 2 Academic
Misconduct Appeal outcome.

8. Records, Monitoring and Confidentiality.
8.1.

The Student Governance Team monitors academic misconduct cases across the University
and Partner institutions to identify trends, undertake preventative work and improvements
that may be required.

8.2.

The University will process information in accordance with the Data Protection Act and UK
General Data Protection Regulations (GDPR) 2018. Further information regarding how the
University collects, processes and stores personal data can be found in the University’s
Student Privacy Policy. The Directorate will retain information related to academic misconduct
matters in accordance with the Retention Schedule.

8.3.

Academic misconduct cases and outcomes will be handled with an appropriate level of
confidentiality with information only released to those who need to know for the purposes of
considering the allegation of academic misconduct, processing and responding to an academic
misconduct appeal. No third party will be told more than what is considered necessary regarding
the circumstances of the allegations and any outcome.

8.4.

The Senior Management Team (SMT) and relevant University committees are provided with

16

Academic Misconduct Procedures

anonymised data, reports concerning academic misconduct cases considered under this
Procedure for purpose of identifying trends, areas of good practice and improvements to
processes and practices.

17

Academic Misconduct Procedures

Part 3 – Schedules
Schedule 1: Definitions of Types of Academic Misconduct
This Procedure acknowledges that at the early stages of a student’s academic journey, proficiency in
academic writing and/or conventions are still being developed and instances of Poor Academic Practice
may occur. Poor Academic Practice is when a student submits any form of assessment that does not
properly reference or cite the sources of their research, ideas, data and words used in their assessment.
The table below is a non-exhaustive list of the types of Academic Misconduct and their definitions. The
following are designed to be illustrative examples of academic misconduct:

Type of Academic
Misconduct

Definition

Examination Misconduct

Examination Misconduct is when someone acts dishonestly or unfairly
before, during, or after an examination or a time-constrained assessment
which may result in one student gaining or potentially gaining an unfair
advantage over another.

Collusion

Collusion can occur when two or more students collaborate in the
production of work, and this is submitted as the efforts of an individual.
The assessed work is therefore falsely being presented as the
individual’s own work.
This can occur knowingly, or unknowingly through negligence by one
student sharing their own work with another student, and where one or
more of the students then submit similar items of work.

Contract Cheating
(also referred to as
Commissioning)

Contract cheating (also known as assessment outsourcing,
commissioning or ghost writing) occurs when a student(s) seeks out
another party (including generative AI) to produce work for the purposes
of submitting that work for assessment and it is, either wholly or in part,
not the student’s own work.

18

Academic Misconduct Procedures

Contract cheating may involve payments made which can either be
financial or payments in kind but can also occur without payment.
Duplication
(also referred to as SelfPlagiarism)

Duplication (also referred to as self-plagiarism) is the submission of work
that has previously been submitted by the student for assessment
purposes to the University or another institution. This may involve a
significant amount of identical or substantially similar material.

Falsification or Fabrication

Falsification is where someone fabricates, manipulates, invents or distorts
data, evidence, sources and/or citations.

Plagiarism

Plagiarism relates to the act of presenting the material, ideas, and/or
arguments of another person as one’s own in work submitted for
assessment without acknowledgement. It is done in a way that may
deceive the reader as to the source.
Plagiarism can take various forms, including close paraphrasing without
citation, and neglecting to cite referenced materials in the bibliography.

Misuse of Digital Tools

Misuse of digital/generative and other Artificial Intelligence tools
occurs when students use such tools, whether free or behind a
paywall to:
•
•
•
•

augment their work in a misleading way and enhance their work
beyond their current stage of learning;
to paraphrase without understanding the text or how it
contributes to their work;
to falsely insert references;
to falsely inflate the range of academic or subject specific
vocabulary.

19

Academic Misconduct Procedures

Schedule 2: Categories and Sanctions
This schedule provides definitions of each of the main categories (levels) of Academic Misconduct and an
indication of the sanction(s) likely to apply.
(H) – denotes a Higher Sanction which can only be applied when considering previous substantiated
cases of Academic Misconduct.

Category
Minor

Type of Academic Misconduct
Plagiarism including close paraphrasing without the
use of citation, neglecting to cite references materials
in the bibliography, incomplete or incorrectly cited
bibliography.
Misuse of Digital Tools by way of:
paraphrase without understanding of the text or how it
contributes to their assessed work, and/or
falsely inserting references, and/or
augment work in a way that enhances the assessed
work beyond the current stage of learning, and/or
falsely inflated the range of academic or subject
specific vocabulary.
Duplication (also known as self-plagiarism) of an
assessed piece of work submitted previously by the
student either at the University or another institution.
Examination Misconduct by performing any action in
an examination room or time-constrained assessment
that is prohibited by an invigilator or examiner
including:
•
•
•
•

Sanction
Formal Reprimand:
To be entered against the
students record and retained for
the duration of their registration
on the current course of study.
The assessment component is
marked
on its academic merits.
(H) Failure of the assessment
or reassessment attempt in
question:
Where a student is eligible for
reassessment, having failed the
attempt in question, the Board
may offer this in line with the
relevant Regulations.

making use or attempting to make use of
unauthorised items during the examination,
removal of or attempting the removal of
an examination script,
receiving or providing help to another student
during the examination,
copying or attempting to copy from the script of
another student during the examination whether
by overlooking their work, asking for information
or by other means.

20

Academic Misconduct Procedures

Moderate

Plagiarism by use of substantial work taken from
published material, internet sources or another
student’s submission without due acknowledgment of
the material or the source.

Failure of the assessment or
reassessment attempt in
question:

Plagiarism by submitting Artificial Generated (AI)
generated output, as some or part of an assessment
submission and claiming it as the student’s own work
without appropriate citation or declaration.

Where a student is eligible for
reassessment, having failed the
attempt in question, the Board
may offer this in line with the
relevant Regulations.

Collusion by representing work produced in
collaboration with another person or persons as the
work of a single student.

(H) Overall module mark
capped at the pass mark for
the Level of study.
The above sanction would apply
in addition to failure of the
attempt in question and would
be applied only where the
student otherwise passes the
module.

Major

Examination Misconduct by way of access to, or
attempting access to an unseen examination paper,
that is considered to be the property of the University,
prior to the start of an examination or test.
Examination Misconduct by impersonating or
attempting to impersonate another student or asking
another person to impersonate a student, including
generative AI to impersonate the student, in any
assessment.
Examination Misconduct by taking into an
examination a pre-written examination script for
submission and exchanging it for a blank
examination script.
Examination Misconduct by way of use of
technology, manipulating or interfering with remote
proctoring during an examination, including online
exams to gain an advantage or attempt to gain an
advantage.
Contract cheating or commissioning another person
to complete an item of university assessment, which

Failure of the module at the
attempt in question and,
where
(re) assessment is then
completed for the module, the
module will be capped at the
pass mark.
Where a student is eligible for
reassessment in the module,
having failed the attempt in
question, the Board may offer this
in line with the relevant
Regulations.
(H) Reduction of Award
and/or Classification:
Regardless of the students'
overall modules results, they will
receive one of the following as
appropriate to the
circumstances:
•

to one of the validated

21

Academic Misconduct Procedures
is then submitted as a student’s own work. This could
include the use of professional essay writing
services, essay banks, ghost-writing services and
generative AI.
Falsification or Fabrication of data laboratory work,
projects etc. based on work purporting to have been
carried out by the student but which has been
invented, altered or falsified, including failure to secure
appropriate ethical approval in advance of conducting
research, an experiment or study.

•

exit awards for the
course (or, where
appropriate, with
institutional credit)
to a lower classification.

(H) Expulsion:
Recommendation to the Deputy
Vice Chancellor (DVC) that the
student be expelled from the
University including consideration
about whether an exit award /
institutional credits can be
awarded.

22

Academic Misconduct Procedures
Document
information
Document title

Description of document information
Academic Misconduct Procedures

Department owner

Academic Registry

Document owner

Deputy Vice Chancellor

Document manager Director of Student Governance
Document category Academic
Administrative practice
Equality and diversity
Ethics and compliance
Information Technology
Students
Related
University
policies

Regulations and Credit Framework
Regulations for Taught Awards
Regulations for Research Awards
Academic Integrity Policy
Marking Procedures

Related
University
procedures

Exceptional Circumstances Procedure
Fitness to Practise Procedure

Approved by

Education Committee

Date Approved

25 June 2025

Date of
commencement

1 August 2025

Review Date

31 July 2027

Version

Version 5.0

History of
revisions of the
document

Version 1.0 – 28 June 2021
Version 2.0 – 19 July 2021
Version 3.0 – 4 August 2023
Version 4.0 – 19 June 2024
Version 5.0 – 25 June 2025

23
