Senate Handbook

Academic Misconduct

This Handbook supplements Regulations governed by Senate.
It includes policies, procedures, advice and/or guidance that staff and students are
expected to follow in the proper conduct of University business.
This Handbook governs all assessments completed after the implementation date.

Version 3.2 August 2026

Handbook: Academic Misconduct

1

Contents
1
Introduction
PART A What is Academic Misconduct?
2
What is academic misconduct?
2.1
Plagiarism: not acknowledging your sources
2.2
Plagiarism: improper or incomplete referencing
2.3
Self-plagiarism/duplication
2.4
Intending to deceive the examiners
2.5
Cheating under test conditions
2.6
Falsification / fabrication of experimental or other investigative results
2.7
Using another person to produce or complete an assessment
2.8
Theft of another student’s work
2.9
Collusion
2.10
The use of AI-generated content
2.11
Poor Academic Practice
PART B Guidance and Advice for Students
3
How to avoid academic misconduct
3.1
Support for students
3.2
Submitting assessments (taught students)
3.3
Submitting your thesis (research students)
3.4
Using Turnitin effectively
3.5
Help with assessments
3.6
Advice and support
3.7
Data Protection and Privacy
PART C Guidance for Academic Staff
4
Supporting students
4.1
General awareness raising and learning support
4.2
Student responsibilities
4.3
Supporting students who have committed academic misconduct
4.4
Data Protection and Privacy
5
Detection of academic misconduct
5.1
Turnitin and other methods of detecting academic misconduct
5.2
Detection of use of AI-generated content
5.3
Academic misconduct during an examination
5.4
Academic misconduct in taught degrees
5.5
Academic misconduct in research degrees
5.6
Reporting alleged academic misconduct
PART D Investigating Allegations of Academic Misconduct
6
Stages of an investigation into an allegation of academic misconduct
7
Student rights during the investigation
7.1
Transparency
7.2
Right to a fair hearing
7.3
Supporting the investigation
8
Stage 1 – Informal investigation
9
Stage 2 – Formal investigation
10
Stage 3 – Review
11
External complaint
Appendix A
Penalties applied following an upheld allegation of academic misconduct – taught
Appendix B
Penalties applied following an upheld allegation of academic misconduct – research
Appendix C
Poor academic practice
Appendix D
Arrangements for students based outside of the UK

3
4
4
5
5
5
5
6
6
6
7
7
8
8
9
9
9
9
10
10
10
11
11
13
13
13
13
13
13
15
15
15
16
16
16
17
18
18
19
19
19
19
21
22
24
26
28
30
32
33

Changes to this document since version 3.1 (August 2025)
•
•
•
•
•

Updates to reflect structural changes within the University (throughout)
Updated sections on help with assignments and support (3.5, 3.6)
Note added that all evidence must be in English (7.3)
Note added that apprentice’s employers will be informed of formal disciplinary
investigations (8)
Updated guidance on completion of procedures letters (11)

Version 3.2 August 2026

Handbook: Academic Misconduct

2

1

Introduction

This Handbook describes the University’s definition of “academic misconduct” and its approved
procedures for the management of allegations of academic misconduct. This Handbook applies to
all students of the University, and where procedures differ between taught and research students
these are clearly noted. Taught students include those studying for a named taught award (both
(Postgraduate and Undergraduate), those studying as part of an apprenticeship and those students
studying for credit as short course or associate students (i.e. all students who may submit or
undergo an assessment for the award of credit).
“Academic misconduct” is defined by the University as an attempt by a student to gain an unfair
advantage over others in the assessment associated with a programme of study, either by cheating,
by plagiarising (with or without intention to deceive), by theft of another’s work, falsification or
fabrication of data or using another person to produce or complete work for assessment with or
without the intention to deceive. Section 2 provides a range of offences which fall under this
definition, as well as guidance on the use of AI-generated content. Details of the possible penalties
applied to students found guilty of academic misconduct can be found in Appendix A (taught
students) and Appendix B (research students).
This Handbook supplements Regulation 25 of the University’s Regulations and outlines the details
of the procedures that will be followed in the event of an allegation made against one or more
student.
Throughout this Handbook, the term “Academic Conduct Officer” is used to describe the role being
undertaken by the relevant trained persons within the Faculties. The remit of an Academic Conduct
Officer (ACO) is to offer general advice to staff on academic misconduct matters and advice on
specific cases of suspected academic misconduct. ACOs also act as the University’s disciplinary
officers and constitute the members of Academic Conduct Panels.
All students should make themselves familiar with Section 2-3 of this Handbook. Sections 6-10 will
be helpful if an allegation of misconduct has been made against you. Guidance for staff is provided
in Sections 4-5. Staff studying for the Postgraduate Certificate in Academic Practice (PGCAP)
should read this Handbook alongside the information contained in the Assessment Guidelines
supplied to them for the PGCAP course.
In addition to this Handbook, the University has a Research Integrity Policy, which can be found on
the University website. For staff candidates working towards a research degree the Research
Integrity Policy may be invoked instead of the processes in this Academic Misconduct Handbook.
Such a decision will be at the discretion of the investigators, taking into consideration factors such
as the seniority of the staff candidate’s position, the nature of the offence and its context (for
example an alleged offence relating to work undertaken for delivery to an external partner/client or
funding body or other work as part of their employment contract would fall under the Research
Integrity process, while for work relating only to their research degree, the alleged offence may be
considered under the academic misconduct process).
Throughout this Handbook timescales are referred to as measured in working days. Working days
do not include any weekend days or days where the University is closed (public bank holidays or
published University closure days).
This Handbook assigns responsibilities for various processes and decisions to particular postholders
in the University. Where required for the operation of the University, specific responsibilities may be
given to other members of the University by agreement between the relevant University Officers,
such arrangements to be recorded by the Secretary to Senate until such time as the Handbook is
updated.

Version 3.2 August 2026

Handbook: Academic Misconduct

3

PART A
2

WHAT IS ACADEMIC MISCONDUCT?

What is academic misconduct and why is it
important?

Cranfield University awards academic qualifications to students on the basis of their achievements
in accordance with the criteria laid down for particular assessments. Academic integrity is
fundamental to the values promoted by the University, and assessments are designed so that you
are assessed on your knowledge, skills and abilities. The University prides itself on, and works hard
to ensure, the academic integrity of all of its awards. Students are expected to take pride in their
studies and uphold a high level of academic integrity throughout, including maintaining Research
Integrity (which applies to both research and taught students).
The University has adopted Universities UK Concordat to Support Research Integrity, and upholds
its principles which are:
•
Upholding the highest standards of rigour and integrity in all aspects of research
•
Ensuring that research is conducted according to appropriate ethical, legal and professional
frameworks, obligations and standards
•
Supporting a research environment that is underpinned by a culture of integrity and based on
good governance, best practice, and support for the development of researchers
•
Using transparent, timely, robust and fair processes to deal with allegations of research
misconduct should they arise
•
Working together to strengthen the integrity of research and to review progress regularly and
openly
All researchers are responsible for understanding, implementing and maintaining the highest
standard of rigour and integrity relevant to their work at all times.
It is imperative that all members of the University recognise the responsibilities that they share for
developing and maintaining a culture in which sound research practices are adopted and
inappropriate ones detected and dealt with. Every employee and student of Cranfield has a duty to
inform the appropriate authorities if they know or suspect that there has been a breach of good
conduct.
Students are referred to the University’s Research Integrity Policy, the process for its implementing
and monitoring and to the University’s Research Ethics Policy.
The University identifies a number of practices it considers to be breaches of academic misconduct,
and these are outlined in the sections below. This list is not exhaustive, and academic judgement
may be used to identify other instances of academic misconduct. It is important to note that these
regulations concern all work submitted for assessment, including assignments, examinations, theses
and progress review reports.
When investigating allegations of academic misconduct, any investigation (whether formal or
informal) will be undertaken to determine if academic misconduct has occurred, regardless of
whether this was intentional or unintentional on the part of the student; academic misconduct, even
if committed unintentionally, negatively affects the integrity of research and the University’s awards.
Intention to commit academic misconduct (or a lack of intention) may, however, be considered by an
investigator when determining the appropriate penalty to be applied.
The University, along with the rest of the UK higher education sector, takes a serious view of
academic misconduct and you are expected to be aware of the categories of academic misconduct
and how to avoid them.

Version 3.2 August 2026

Handbook: Academic Misconduct

4

2.1

Plagiarism: not acknowledging your sources

Plagiarism is the use, without acknowledgement, of the intellectual work of other people, and the act
of representing the ideas or discoveries of others as your own in submitted assessments and
publications. The University reviews the majority of assessments submitted by you, including
research theses, using an external non-originality detection system (Turnitin). Plagiarism may also
be detected from drafts of reports, conference abstracts, presentations and papers by your module
leader or supervisor and co-authors, by reviewers of abstracts and manuscripts submitted to
conferences and journals, and by your examiners and progress review panel members.
The use of other people’s research, written works, or phrasing without proper acknowledgement is
considered to be plagiarism, whether or not you intended to deceive the markers, examiners or
reviewers. You are strongly advised to avoid copying and/or “cutting and pasting” the work of
others, unless you reference those sources properly.
The unattributed use of any source is plagiarism. At all times you should ensure that you are using
credible sources for your work and that you acknowledge them appropriately, taking particular care
when using material sourced from the internet.
Plagiarism may also include circumstances where minor amendments are made to disguise the
original source, or to pass off an idea as your own simply because you have changed the way that
idea is expressed.
Note: A common excuse for plagiarism of this type is not having enough time to complete the work:
tight deadlines will not be considered a reasonable defence against plagiarism.

2.2

Plagiarism: improper or incomplete referencing

Improper or incomplete referencing is plagiarism. If text is copied directly from another source, it
should be placed in quotation marks or another suitable identifier. All other source material should
be accompanied by clear references in the text where the material is utilised. Library staff and your
academic advisers can advise you on how to reference properly for your academic discipline.

2.3

Self-plagiarism/duplication

Self-plagiarism or duplication is the submission, in whole or in part, of your own work that has
previously been submitted for a different assignment or research project (either at Cranfield or
elsewhere) or published. Whilst it is acceptable for you to make brief reference to your own studies
and findings, it is unacceptable to resubmit material that has already been assessed unless this has
been expressly permitted.
All work submitted must be a student’s own work and have been produced specifically for the
intended assessment. Where a student has completed prior research and/or submitted any work
towards another academic distinction this may be referenced as a source material, but not form part
of that student’s ‘original contribution to knowledge’ for their intended award. This applies whether
the work has been submitted for an award at Cranfield or at another institution.

2.4

Intending to deceive the examiners

When considering cases of plagiarism, academic staff may receive evidence to prove that you have
deliberately set out to pass someone else’s work off as your own, including the use of essay-writing
services. In such cases, where evidence of cheating and plagiarism is present, this may result in a
more serious penalty.

Version 3.2 August 2026

Handbook: Academic Misconduct

5

2.5

Cheating under test conditions

Examples of cheating under test conditions include:
a)
b)
c)
d)
e)

having access or attempting to gain access, during a formal examination, to any unauthorised
material, electronic device or calculator;
copying from another examination candidate;
aiding, or attempting to aid, another examination candidate;
communicating, or attempting to communicate, with anyone other than an official invigilator
during a formal examination; and
allowing another person to impersonate you in a formal examination, progress review meeting
or viva.

2.6 Falsification/Fabrication of experimental or other investigative
results
This includes either changing or manipulating data in order to support a hypothesis, or inventing
data (e.g. experimental results, interview questions or answers, survey results), which are then
reported as genuine observations or measurements. In addition, this includes image manipulation
and omittance of inconvenient or outlier data.

2.7 Using another person to produce or complete an assessment (or
completing an assessment on behalf of another student) and contract
cheating
This involves any means where you submit work for assessment which has been produced – in part
or in full - by someone else (e.g. another student, someone from outside the University, or internet
“cheat sites” or “essay banks”). This may also include where work submitted for assessment has
been completed (in full or in part) by generative AI Techniques or similar.
It is considered reasonable for students to allow others to proof-read their work, but this should be
limited to comments on style, spelling and grammar. Proof-readers should not be used to re-write or
restructure your work. All work submitted for assessment by you must be written by you, and you
should confirm this on submission.
Further guidance on what is and what is not acceptable help from others is available in section 3.5
of this Handbook and on the staff Hub and MyCranfield/MyMKU student portals.
Writing (in full or in part) an assignment, progress review report or section of a thesis on behalf of
another student is also a form of academic misconduct, and if found guilty of impersonating another
student you will be penalised for intending to deceive the examiners (if you are also completing the
same assessment) or through the University’s disciplinary policy.
Contract cheating involves ‘contracting’ (through payment or other means) somebody else to
complete an assessment (in full or in part) on your behalf, or obtaining and submitting an
assessment as if it were your own. Websites and companies that offer contract cheating services
(often known as essay mills) are illegal in England, and persons operating such sites and services
are liable to be prosecuted under UK law.
In addition, the use of ‘article spinning’, paraphrasing software, AI-generated content or other online
tools to disguise the use of others’ work as your own is considered academic misconduct.

Version 3.2 August 2026

Handbook: Academic Misconduct

6

2.8

Theft of another student’s/researcher’s work

The theft of another student’s or researcher’s work is viewed as a very serious offence and any
student found committing such an act of academic misconduct will be liable to the most severe
penalties. In addition, if you are found to have put pressure on other students through harassment,
slander or bullying, you will be subject to an additional disciplinary investigation.

2.9

Collusion

Collusion includes both:
• circumstances where two or more candidates work together to (or plan to) jointly to decieve
the examiners in any of the ways listed above (in which case the penalties for that type of
academic misconduct will apply); and
• circumstances where two or more students work together on tasks which should be
completed individually (in which case the penalty applied will be the same as that for
plagiarism).
Collusion occurs where students work with someone else to complete assessed work which should
be completed wholly independently. You should not share your work with another student, either in
person or through electronic means.
There is a difference between collusion and collaboration (see below). Collusion may occur where
students are collaborating but end up working too closely together and in ways which are unfair to
other students.
Course teams should make it clear to students where they may or may not collaborate with fellow
students or others outside of the University, however for the avoidance of doubt, unless a student is
advised otherwise any work which is submitted for assessment must be produced by individual
students on their own without help from others. Students must ensure that all work submitted is their
own and has been produced solely by them.
Collusion may also occur between a student and persons who are not members of the University,
particularly within a workplace (whether as part of a placement or work-based learning with a
student’s employer).
Collaboration
Collaboration, where permitted, is not considered to be academic misconduct. You should have
been advised by academic staff when and how you may collaborate with other students (especially
in group assignments or projects, where you will often work with others to collect data, prepare
reports and presentations and to discuss your work). You should not collaborate with others unless
you have been told to or otherwise advised it is permissible by your course team – collaboration
without permission as part of the assessment may be considered to be collusion (see above).
Collaboration with others is an important part of a research project. Your supervisor should advise
what may or may not be acceptable in terms of collaboration, including explicit guidance on how to
acknowledge the specific contributions of collaborators in the thesis, of co-authors when submitting
a thesis in the form of a series of papers and of papers included in a thesis submitted for the degree
of PhD by portfolio of published works.
Generally, it is considered helpful and appropriate for students to collaborate, through discussing
topics and rehearsing various arguments and propositions, but any formal assessment of you as an
individual should normally be produced independently and submitted as your own work. If you are in
doubt, ask for guidance.

Version 3.2 August 2026

Handbook: Academic Misconduct

7

2.10 The use of AI-generated content
The University awards academic qualifications to individuals on the basis of their own academic
achievements. Assessments are designed to assess an individual’s knowledge, skills and abilities at
a level appropriate to their award.
The attributed use of AI generated or modified text by students in pieces of assessed work is
permissible in principle; however, all use of AI tools must be fully acknowledged by students.
Students must state what the tools have been used for and reference any AI-generated content
used in their submitted work. Students should also acknowledge where they have made use of
translation and standard grammar-checking tools.
Unacknowledged use of AI-generated content is not considered a separate category of academic
misconduct; however, (depending on its use, and following any investigation) it may fall under the
following categories of academic misconduct:
• Plagiarism: not acknowledging your sources (2.1)
• Plagiarism: improper or incomplete referencing (2.2)
• Intending to deceive the examiners (2.4)
• Using another person to produce or complete an assessment (2.7).
It is each student’s responsibility to make themselves aware of the significant risks associated with
the excessive and indiscriminate use of AI-generated content. Such content can contain errors, and
there are significant risks associated with the use of material generated by AI tools which may not
have correctly drawn on, referenced, or attributed material that has been used. It is essential that
students take responsibility for the full and proper checking and referencing of all original source
data.
Further guidance on the use of AI generative tools can be found on the dedicated pages on the Hub,
the MyCranfield Portal and MyMKU Portal.

2.11 Poor academic practice
As set out in Appendix C of this Handbook, the University may issue Poor Academic Practice
Notices to students where concerns about their academic practice are raised in their submitted
work.
Poor academic practice may occur where a student demonstrates a lack of understanding of
academic practice and where the offence is unintentional. It is not considered to be formal academic
misconduct and is not recorded as such (although Poor Academic Practice Notices are retained on
the student’s record). Students may only receive one Poor Academic Practice Notice, and they can
only be issued when the criteria set out in Appendix C are met.

Version 3.2 August 2026

Handbook: Academic Misconduct

8

PART B

GUIDANCE AND ADVICE FOR STUDENTS

3

How to avoid academic misconduct

3.1

Support for students

The University is committed to providing you with information, advice and guidance for avoiding all
forms of academic misconduct.
During induction, all students are provided with information on academic misconduct, and how to
avoid it, as well as, for research students, training on Research Integrity and Ethics. This may take
the form of a lecture in the induction week, or information in the student handbook, or on the course
Virtual Learning Environment (VLE). Research students are required to complete this training prior
to their initial (4 month) review.
Students are also advised to make use of the tutorial sessions offered by Library staff. These
interactive tutorials include sections on referencing and avoiding plagiarism. If a student cannot
attend a tutorial for any reason, staff are always on hand to offer one-to-one advice on proper
referencing.
Students have access to this Handbook through the University website prior to registration and are
asked to confirm that they have received advice on academic misconduct and understand what
constitutes an academic offence. Students must, where advised, also undertake the mandatory
Electronic Referencing and Avoiding Plagiarism (eRAP) module within the first four weeks of
the start date of your course.

3.2

Submitting assessments (taught students)

Taught course students are expected to submit written assessments through a non-originality
detection system called Turnitin, except where expressly advised otherwise by staff. The extent to
which Turnitin should be used will vary from course to course.
Note: In exceptional cases, for example if public access to a thesis is restricted, an assessment may
be exempt from submission to Turnitin. Staff will instead check for occurrences of academic
misconduct manually.
Multiple submissions of assessments and theses can be made to Turnitin. On each occasion
students receive a report that provides an Overall Similarity Index (OSI) and shows where
similarities to other texts appear in the written work; staff can log in to Turnitin to view the report
once a student has made the final submission. Some staff may limit the number of submissions
students can make per assessment.
Once the deadline for any assessment has passed (even if an extension to the submission deadline
has been granted), Turnitin will treat any submission made after this date as the final submission. If
you have an extension, liaise with your SAS Lead regarding how to make multiple submissions after
the original deadline and before your extended deadline.
You will usually be required to submit your work through the VLE; in most cases this involves a
submission to Turnitin. Details should be in your course handbook or will be available from the
course team.
More information about submitting through Turnitin can be found in the Assessment Rules
Handbook and the Undergraduate Awards Handbook.

Version 3.2 August 2026

Handbook: Academic Misconduct

9

3.3 Submitting Your Thesis (research students)
Research students are expected to submit their theses through a non-originality detection system
called Turnitin, except where expressly advised otherwise by staff. Prior to thesis submission they
should also submit at least one other piece of work through Turnitin to familiarise themselves with
the system.
Note: In exceptional cases, for example if public access to a thesis is restricted, an assessment
may be exempt from submission to Turnitin. Staff will instead check for occurrences of academic
misconduct manually.
Multiple submissions of theses can be made to Turnitin. On each occasion the student receives a
report that provides an Overall Similarity Index (OSI) and shows where similarities to other texts
appear in the written work; staff can log into Turnitin to view the report once a student has made
the final submission.
More information about submitting your thesis can be found in the Research Awards Handbook.

3.4

Using Turnitin effectively

The IT Department issues good practice guides for students for using Turnitin.
Most assessments produce some level of similarity with other texts due to common words and
phrases.
Academic staff check all reports to ascertain whether or not academic misconduct may have
occurred. There is no threshold for investigation. Staff use the reports and the OSI scores to inform
their academic judgement, but the OSI figure is never used on its own to prove that plagiarism has
occurred. Turnitin reports are used as a tool to identify and investigate potential instances of
plagiarism but are not solely relied upon as evidence.
If work is referenced correctly, and large chunks of material from other sources have not been used
to construct your assessment, then it is unlikely that an allegation of academic misconduct will be
made.

3.5

Help with assessments

All assessments must be a student’s own work (or in the case of a group project, that group
members’ own work). Students may not employ or engage someone else to complete any of their
assessments (or any other assessment) on their behalf, even if their first language is not English.
Students must ensure that any AI-generated content submitted as part of an assessment is
acknowledged. Unacknowledged use of AI-generated content is considered academic misconduct.
The library team can offer the following guidance:
•
•
•

Training on a variety of topics including effective searching, academic writing, and
referencing.
Individual support with written work including structure, presentation, argument/flow, citations
and referencing.
Self-paced resources in the Study Skills Hub on a range of topics to support learning and
assessment.

For more information see: https://library.cranfield.ac.uk/study-skills-hub/

Version 3.2 August 2026

Handbook: Academic Misconduct

10

Where students do seek advice and support, it is best practice to ask for such advice in notes or
using “tracked changes” in documents. This will ensure that they retain responsibility for choosing
what advice and guidance to accept and incorporate into their work.
Commercial or third-party proofreading services
The University does not prohibit the use of commercial proof-reading services; however, students
are advised to be particularly vigilant if engaging such services to ensure that the academic integrity
of their work is maintained. University staff are not able to recommend any individuals or
organisations providing these services.
Advice and guidance from these services or any third party should not include making or
suggesting changes on a student’s behalf in any of the following areas:
o major structural changes to the work;
o amending or editing ideas, arguments or discussion points;
o removal of plagiarism;
o translation of passages into English;
o correction of information or data.
o
Students must ensure that any third-party proof-reading does not compromise their authorship of the
work submitted, and, in particular, that the substance of the work remains their own. Only final
versions of any work should be submitted for proof-reading. Students are responsible for the work
which they submit, and the use of a third party will not be accepted in mitigation of any deficiencies
or misconduct identified in the work.
Students should retain all versions of their work, and notes and advice provided to them. These can
then be used to demonstrate that the work is their own in the event they are accused of academic
misconduct.

3.6

Advice and support

Further advice and support within the University is available from:
•
•
•
•
•

3.7

your academic advisers (including your Course Director or Supervisor);
an Assistant Registrar;
the Hub or MyCranfield/MyMKU Portals
Cranfield Study Skills Hub
Digital Skills Hub

Data Protection and Privacy

If your case involves other people (e.g. collusion, theft or using a third party to produce an
assessment), your name may be shared with them as part of an investigation if it is relevant to the
case, to allow individuals a fair opportunity to answer an allegation made against them. Similarly,
another person’s name may be shared with you if it is appropriate to do so. You should not discuss
the case with any individuals named.
Any information relating to an alleged case of academic misconduct, including any evidence
obtained and notes taken during meetings with Academic Conduct Officers and/or an Academic
Conduct Panel will be retained in line with the University’s Data Retention Schedule. Students have
the right to request copies of these notes if they wish.

Version 3.2 August 2026

Handbook: Academic Misconduct

11

In addition, students should be aware that any alleged instances of Academic Misconduct involving
UKRI funded research students will be reported by the University to the relevant Research Council.
Students should be aware that any alleged instances of Academic Misconduct involving students on
a scholarship will be reported to the student funding team.
For Apprenticeship students, their organisation will be informed should an investigation be
progressed to the formal stage 2 investigation.
Students who are serving military personnel should note any academic misconduct will be reported
to the MOD, who may take further action against a student.

Version 3.2 August 2026

Handbook: Academic Misconduct

12

PART C

GUIDANCE FOR ACADEMIC STAFF

4

Supporting Students

4.1

General awareness raising and learning support

Course Directors (taught course students) and Supervisors (of research students) are expected to
outline issues around academic misconduct (and particularly proper referencing and the risks of
unintended plagiarism) and research misconduct to all students as part of their induction. This may
be through a specific lecture, through detailed information in course handbooks or on course VLEs
or through more targeted information.
Staff should draw attention to this Handbook, which contains information on University policies and
procedures, and the likely penalties if a student commits academic misconduct.
Course Directors and Supervisors should also encourage their students to attend library
presentations and tutorials on referencing and plagiarism. Library staff run interactive tutorials on
referencing and avoiding plagiarism, which are available throughout the year and can be booked
online. They are also able to offer advice on referencing to individual students on request. Guides
for students on using Turnitin, produced by IT Services, are also available on the Digital Skills Hub,
Learning and teaching (for students).
The University has issued guidance on the use of AI by students, which can be found in Section 2 of
this Handbook, as well as in the Postgraduate Students’ Handbook, the Undergraduate Students'
Handbook and the Research Awards Handbook. As this is an emerging technology further guidance
on this topic may be issued throughout the year.

4.2

Student Responsibilities

As part of their online registration task, all students are asked to confirm, via the University’s student
portal (EVE), that they have received advice on plagiarism and understand what constitutes an
academic offence. Students are also required to undertake the online tutorial on referencing and
plagiarism (eRAP). This is, where advised, a mandatory requirement for all students. Noncompletion of the eRAP module is not a valid defence for any academic misconduct offence
Students can access further training from the Library, and may be referred to this training if deemed
necessary.

4.3

Supporting students who have committed academic misconduct

If a student is found guilty of academic misconduct through the appropriate procedures, the
investigator(s) will make a recommendation of a penalty to be applied to that student’s affected
piece of work. For taught course students, this is likely to be a reduced or zero mark for the work in
question; for research students, it is likely to result in a fail or a revise and represent outcome.
Please support any student who is found guilty of an academic penalty in advising them of the
implications for their continuing studies and their overall results. As a Course Director or Supervisor,
you should also discuss with them how to avoid repeating any future acts of academic misconduct.

4.4

Data Protection and Privacy

Any information relating to an alleged case of academic misconduct, including any evidence
obtained and notes taken during meetings with Academic Conduct Officers and/or an Academic
Conduct Panel will be retained in line with the University’s Data Retention Schedule.

Version 3.2 August 2026

Handbook: Academic Misconduct

13

In addition:
• any alleged instances of Academic Misconduct involving UKRI funded research students will
be reported by the University to the relevant Research Council.
•

any alleged instances of Academic Misconduct involving students on a scholarship will be
reported to the student funding team.

•

For apprenticeship students, their organisation will be informed should an investigation be
progressed to the formal stage 2 investigation.

•

For students who are serving military personnel, any academic misconduct will be reported
to the MOD, who may take further action against a student.

Version 3.2 August 2026

Handbook: Academic Misconduct

14

5

Detection of academic misconduct

5.1

Turnitin and other methods of detecting academic misconduct

Taught course students are expected to submit written assessments to Turnitin. Research students
are expected to submit their theses and at least one other piece of work prior to this, to Turnitin1.
The university may use AI detection systems and techniques, for example as available within
Turnitin, to identify possible AI or other machine generated content. This can be reviewed by staff to
assist but is not an indicator of misconduct and must be supplemented by an academic assessment.
Students are allowed to make multiple submissions of each assessment to Turnitin (or of any piece
of work for research students). Staff can restrict this functionality if they feel it to be appropriate for a
particular assignment. Any questions concerning the set-up of Turnitin should be directed to IT
Services.
Staff are encouraged to use the Overall Similarity Index (OSI) report as a comparative tool. For
research students, supervisors should check the Turnitin report after submission of a student’s
thesis. The OSI in isolation is not an indicator of plagiarism and must be supplemented by an
academic assessment of the probable causes of a high similarity percentage. Turnitin is not a firm
indicator of academic misconduct and academic misconduct officers and/or Academic Conduct
Panels (ACPs) will not consider cases where Course Directors or Supervisors fail to provide a clear
evidence base for the allegation.
If a student’s assessment or research thesis is restricted for public access, then checks for
academic misconduct should be undertaken manually as it may not be appropriate to submit the
assessment to Turnitin.
Academic misconduct (especially forms other than plagiarism) are of course uncovered through
other means than Turnitin, and the same principle of academic judgement must be employed.

5.2

Detection of use of AI-generated content

The attributed use of AI-generated or modified text by students in pieces of assessment is
permissible in principle. Students must, however, acknowledge all use of AI tools, state what they
have used them for, and acknowledge any AI-generated content. This should include an
acknowledgement of the use of any non-standard grammar-checking tools.
Any work submitted containing unacknowledged AI-generated content will be considered as
submission of the work of others without attribution, which is considered to be plagiarism, and
should be investigated as a form of academic misconduct.
The University does not have a formal tool in place for the detection of use by students of AI
assistance in completing pieces of assessment. The following is a non-exhaustive list of features or
characteristics staff should look out for when marking students’ work:
• sections of text which:
o are of a different style or tone to the rest of an assessment
o show a different level of understanding or analysis to other parts of the assessment,
o are different to the work they would expect of a particular student,
• a very low similarity score - AI text is essentially unique as it uses probability in determining
the next word based on the question and what has been generated so far. Human written
answers almost always have similarity with other work.
1 Exceptions may apply when the thesis contains restricted or secret content, or where parts of the thesis are

in a format which cannot be submitted to Turnitin.

Version 3.2 August 2026

Handbook: Academic Misconduct

15

•
•
•
•
•

Perfect, or near perfect, grammar; humans tend to make mistakes when writing. AI
generated text often uses complex grammar rules as standard so contains very few or no
grammatical errors.
Lots of very short, or very long, sentences; humans may have a style like this, but it is rarely
predictable or in a pattern.
Excessive Repetition throughout the work.
Sentences that do not make logical sense.
References that do not exist, or are combinations of real but unlinked journals, authors and
titles.

Staff concerned that a student has used unacknowledged AI-generated content in an assessment
should follow the investigation process set out in this Handbook.
Where a submitted assessment is suspected of containing unattributed AI-generated content this
may be reviewed through a separate Turnitin add-on tool known as AI Writing Detection (AIWD). It is
not enabled as standard – staff should contact the Student Casework Team for support with this.

5.3

Academic misconduct during an examination

Any invigilator with concerns over the conduct of a student or students during an examination should
note these in detail on the Invigilator report form. Registry staff should ensure that any such
concerns are passed to the Module Leader, who will then follow Stage 1 of the academic
misconduct procedure.

5.4

Academic misconduct in taught degrees

Academic misconduct is usually detected post-submission of assessments for taught courses.
Where academic misconduct is suspected, taught assessments should be marked alongside other
submitted assessments. If the allegation is subsequently upheld, the appropriate penalty should be
applied to the piece of work.

5.5

Academic misconduct in research degrees

Students studying for a research degree are expected to uphold academic and research integrity at
all times during their studies, including in work submitted for progress reviews, to their supervisor for
comment or for formal examination as part of their thesis. Academic misconduct can be detected
and reported at any stage of a research student’s study. For research students, academic
misconduct may relate to all of a student’s outputs, including reports, journal papers and conference
abstracts and presentations, in addition to their thesis, and may also concern undertaking unethical
research and failure to follow relevant University policies.
Upheld allegations of academic misconduct may be reported to third parties involved in a research
student’s study (such as funding bodies, industrial partners etc.) where the University is required to
for contractual or other reasons.
Where academic misconduct is detected following submission of a research thesis any viva for that
thesis should not be held until the investigation into the alleged academic misconduct is completed,
including the student’s right to request a review of a formal Stage 2 decision (Stage 3), which must
be done within twenty working days of the Stage 2 decision.2 This applies regardless of how and by
whom the academic misconduct was detected. The thesis should not be sent to External Examiners
whilst an investigation is ongoing, or if it has already been sent, the External Examiner should be
advised not to undertake any further work on that thesis until informed otherwise.
2

A viva may be held within 20 working days of the Stage 2 outcome where the student has informed the
Student Casework Team that they do not intend to submit a request for a Stage 3 Review.

Version 3.2 August 2026

Handbook: Academic Misconduct

16

Where academic misconduct is detected or suspected at a viva itself (for example where the student
does not seem to understand areas of the written thesis fully to the point it seems that they have not
written it, or where academic misconduct is (inadvertently or otherwise) admitted), the thesis
examiners may choose to:
• Postpone the viva to allow for an investigation into the suspected academic misconduct;
• Complete the viva, and agree between themselves a recommended outcome subject to the
outcome of any academic misconduct investigation;
• Complete the viva but defer a decision on the recommendation of the outcome until the
outcome of an academic misconduct investigation is known.
In all of the above cases, the student should not be informed of any provisional viva outcome.
The penalties that apply to research students are set out in Appendix B of this Handbook. For more
serious offences relating to submission of a final thesis the thesis Examiners may be instructed to
consider only the sections of the final submission which are not influenced by academic misconduct,
and/or may be instructed to grant only a lower award, not a student’s intended award.

5.6

Reporting alleged academic misconduct

Any person who suspects that an academic offence has occurred should pass information about the
suspected offence and supporting evidence to the Module Leader (taught students) or Supervisor
(research students), who will complete a Stage 1 Academic Misconduct form (available on the Hub),
(for taught course students the Module Leader should pass the completed form to the Course
Director). The Course Director or Supervisor will then consider the case and confirm whether they
agree that there is evidence to support the allegation of academic misconduct (Stage 1 – see
Section 8 for further details). They can at this stage seek advice from an Academic Conduct Officer
(see Section 6) and discuss the matter with the student themselves.
Any alleged instances of Academic Misconduct involving UKRI funded research students should be
reported to the relevant Research Council. Research student Supervisors should inform the SAS
Lead when an allegation of misconduct is made against a Research student, who will ensure the
allegation is reported to the Research Council if necessary. The outcome of any
allegation/investigation should also be reported to the relevant Research Council and, for military
students, the MOD.
If the Course Director or Supervisor dismisses the allegation, they should notify the SAS lead and
Student Casework Team, who will both keep a record.
To instigate a formal case against a student (Stage 2), the Course Director or Supervisor should
notify the SAS Lead and send the completed Stage 1 Academic Misconduct Form with documentary
evidence, to the Student Casework Team at academicmisconduct@cranfield.ac.uk. Cases must be
put forward to Stage 2 within 20 working days of the date of the release of the marks for that
assessment (taught) or formal notification of the viva outcome (research).
The evidence will comprise:
• Turnitin report (if applicable);
• the marked assessment or thesis (annotated if applicable to indicate the relevant sections);
• additional source material (annotated to indicate relevant sections);
• any other useful information (e.g. emails from students, assessment criteria, information from
markers and/or examiners);
• Turnitin link.
The Course Director or Supervisor should ensure that the form contains a detailed case setting out
the evidence for academic misconduct and that it clearly demonstrates that academic judgement
has been employed.

Version 3.2 August 2026

Handbook: Academic Misconduct

17

PART D

6

INVESTIGATING ALLEGATIONS OF
ACADEMIC MISCONDUCT

Stages of an investigation into an allegation of
academic misconduct

All allegations of academic misconduct are managed in the following way:

STAGE 1

The Course Director (taught students) or Supervisor (research students
undertake an informal investigation (see Section 8)
informal investigation - preliminary enquiries made to verify the truth of any
allegation
- rapid resolution sought
- outcomes are either dismissal of the allegation, a Poor
Academic Practice notice or a referral to a Stage 2
investigation, with supporting evidence
Students have the right to submit evidence to a Stage 2 investigation,
managed by the Student Casework Team (see Section 9).

STAGE 2

formal investigation - detailed enquiries and a full and documented
investigation is undertaken to verify the truth of any
allegation and determine any appropriate penalty or
redress
- outcomes may be dismissal of the allegation, a Poor
Academic Practice Notice or the allegation being
upheld, with an appropriate penalty applied (up to and
including a zero mark of the piece of assessment and/or
an overall fail result for the award)
Students have the right to contact the Student Casework Team to
request a Stage 3 review of any decision made at Stage 2 providing that
the permitted grounds are met – see Section 10.

STAGE 3

review

- students may request a review of the decision to the
Academic Registrar against the outcome under certain
circumstances as set out in Section 10
- they can either dismiss the request (if it is not
appropriate) or will refer the review to the appropriate
authority
- the review will either be dismissed by them, or upheld,
with a revised decision and/or penalty applied

If at this stage a student believes that they have been treated unfairly, they can complain
to a body outside of the University.

Version 3.2 August 2026

Handbook: Academic Misconduct

18

7

Student rights during the investigation

The following rights apply to all internal stages of an investigation (i.e. Stages 1, 2 and 3).

7.1

Transparency

During the course of any formal3 investigation, students will be informed by the Student Casework
Team and kept up to date of:
• the names of the people who have been appointed to investigate the allegation;
• the projected timescales for the completion of any investigation and, if there are unexpected
delays or deferrals, any revised timescales;
• if relevant, the names of other students involved in the investigation (e.g. for cases of
collusion);
• the final decision(s), in the form of a written report for a Stage 2 or Stage 3 investigation.
Students are entitled to receive on request copies of any evidence or key documents that influences
the final decision of the investigators. If the request is made prior to the conclusion of the
investigation, students have the right to rebut or dispute the honesty or accuracy of that evidence. If
requested after the Stage 2 investigation has concluded, students may rebut or dispute the evidence
via a Stage 3 request. Any Stage 3 Review request will be required to meet the permissible criteria
to be accepted (see Section 10). If requested after the Stage 3 investigation has concluded, there is
no further right to rebut or dispute the evidence however students may proceed to an external
complaint to the Office of the Independent Adjudicator (see Section 11).

7.2

Right to a fair hearing

The University takes any investigation very seriously and is committed to ensuring that it appoints
investigators who are not prejudiced or biased against any person involved in the investigation.
If there are personal or educational circumstances, to the extent where the investigators may have
made pre-informed decisions about the case, or where the investigator has been substantially
involved in supporting the student throughout their studies, either the student or the investigator may
raise these with the relevant Director of Education or Director of Research. They will then consider
whether those circumstances represent a “conflict of interest” in the member of staff serving as an
investigator and will either appoint a different investigator(s) or explain why this is not appropriate or
necessary.

7.3

Supporting the investigation

Students are required to meet reasonable requests of the investigators, including attending informal
meetings with them and/or with others.
Students have the right to refuse to meet the investigators or provide evidence, but on the
understanding that any right to request a review (Stage 3) of the final decision on the grounds of
incomplete evidence may then be deemed invalid by the Academic Registrar.
Students have the right to be accompanied in any meeting they may have by any person they
choose. This person shall be referred to as a “friend” in any meeting or formal report. If students
wish to bring a friend to a meeting, they are required to notify the investigators in advance. The
friend is entitled to discuss any matter with the student during the course of the meeting (including
requesting a private discussion) but is not entitled to represent their views on their behalf.

3 Students may not be made aware that a Stage 1 informal investigation has been considered by their Course Director or

Supervisor if the allegation is found to be unproven.

Version 3.2 August 2026

Handbook: Academic Misconduct

19

In the event that the meeting is taking place online then the student should have access to a
functional camera, and should be on camera for the duration of the meeting.
All evidence submiitted as part of the investigation should be English.
During the course of any investigation, students have the right to ask for a reasonable deferral of
any meeting with the investigator, or any deadline of request for information, but only on the grounds
that they need further time to prepare for the requested meeting or information. The investigators
reserve the right to continue their investigations in the meantime, and to reach a decision if they
deem the deferrals to be unreasonable.
During any meeting or interview, the student or friend is entitled to ask for copies of any evidence
discussed with them, and for a short break either to discuss any points being raised in order to
collect or to discuss thoughts in private

Version 3.2 August 2026

Handbook: Academic Misconduct

20

8

Stage 1 – Informal investigation

An informal investigation arises from a member of staff, student or persons external to the University
making an allegation of academic misconduct. These are submitted to the Course Director (usually
through the Module Leader) for taught course students or the Supervisor for research students, or to
an Academic Conduct Officer (through at academicmisconduct@cranfield.ac.uk), who normally will
refer the allegation to the Course Director or Supervisor.
At the commencement of a Stage 1 investigation any alleged instances of academic misconduct
involving UKRI funded research students should be reported to the Student Casework Team at the
point of instigating a Stage 1 investigation, so that these can be reported to UKRI through the
Research team in Academic Excellence.
The initial informal investigation is intended to establish whether there is a prima facie case to
answer. It should be conducted swiftly. The evidence may include a Turnitin report, with an
assessment of the reasons behind a high or very low4 OSI score. Where the Course Director or
Supervisor are the person making an allegation, they should consult with another relevant member
of staff (second supervisor, Programme Director or Deputy Course Director etc.) to consider if there
is a prima facie case to answer.
The Course Director or Supervisor may or may not talk to the student(s) to investigate the allegation,
and may talk to other staff, including module leaders, progress review panel members, examiners,
course administrators and examination invigilators, or to other students, depending on the nature of
the allegation.
Where a Course Director or Supervisor believes that the student is guilty of poor academic practice
(see Appendix C) rather than academic misconduct, they may at this stage issue a Poor Academic
Practice Notice. This can only be done providing the case meets the criteria set out in Appendix C. If
this is the case, the Course Director or Supervisor will discuss the matter with the student and
complete the form available on the Hub, to be forwarded to the correct SAS Lead. The fully signed
form should then be passed to the Student Casework Team at
academicmisconduct@cranfield.ac.uk, who will record the case details and outcome.
For taught students, if a Course Director believes that there is a prima facie academic misconduct
case to answer, they will escalate a formal case against a student to Stage 2. For research students,
the Supervisor will pass the case and any evidence they have gathered to the student’s Review
Panel Chair, who will independently assess whether the case should be escalated to a formal Stage
2 investigation.
Once a decision has been made to escalate an allegation to Stage 2 the Course Director or Review
Panel Chair should send the completed Stage 1 Academic Misconduct Form with documentary
evidence, to the Student Casework Team at academicmisconduct@cranfield.ac.uk, who will record
the case details and arrange for the allegation to be formally investigated. Cases must be put
forward to Stage 2 within 20 working days of the date of the release of the marks for that
assessment (taught) or formal notification of the viva outcome (research).
Otherwise, they will dismiss the allegation, inform the SAS Lead and Student Casework team and
notify the relevant Director of Education or Director of Research. The student(s) should be advised
that the allegation has been dismissed, if previously made aware of the informal investigation. In
exceptional circumstances, the Director of Education or Director of Research may refer a case for a
Stage 2 investigation irrespective of the outcome of the informal investigation.
If the outcome of the Stage 1 investigation is the recommendation for a formal Stage 2 investigation
to take place, the student(s) will be advised to co-operate fully in that process and await its
outcomes. For Apprenticeship students, their organisation will be informed should an investigation
be progressed to the formal stage 2 investigation.

4 A very low OSI score may be an indication of a student having used AI-generated material in their work.

Version 3.2 August 2026

Handbook: Academic Misconduct

21

9

Stage 2 – Formal investigation

Cases of suspected academic misconduct must be escalated to the Student Casework Team within
20 working days of the date of the release of the marks for that assessment (taught) or formal
notification of the viva outcome (research) in order for a Stage 2 investigation to take place. Cases
put forwards after this date will be dismissed as being out of time.
The Student Casework Team will appoint a trained Academic Conduct Officer (ACO), or an
Academic Conduct Panel, made up of at least three Academic Conduct Officers (ACOs) to carry out
the formal investigation. Cases are referred to a Panel if they are particularly complex. If the
student(s) has any concerns that an Academic Conduct Officer is too familiar with the case to
undertake the investigation, this should be raised as soon as possible with the Head of Faculty, who
will consider whether an alternative ACO should be appointed.
When sending forward the case for investigation, the Student Casework team will inform the
investigator whether the student has a Student Support Plan in place. Investigators should then
make reasonable adjustments where appropriate (in consultation with a Learning Support Officer if
required), to accommodate these needs (e.g. meet in a ground floor room if student has mobility
issues, emails sent during working hours to allow the student the opportunity to access support
where required etc.).
It is highly likely in a formal investigation that the student(s) will be required to have a formal and
structured meeting with the ACO or with the Academic Conduct Panel, at which notes are likely to
be taken (usually by a note taker). The student(s) may bring a friend to this meeting and take notes.
The student(s) may also ask to see the notes made by the ACO or Academic Conduct Panel or note
taker, to check them for accuracy.
At the meeting, the ACO or Academic Conduct Panel will discuss the allegation with the student(s)
before inviting them to make any further comments. This is an opportunity to admit or refute the
allegation and to offer any explanations. Students should raise any personal mitigating and/or
exceptional circumstances with the ACO or Academic Conduct Panel (with evidence supplied
through the Student Casework Team if necessary), in order that these can be taken into
consideration by the relevant Director of Education or Research when making a final decision on the
allegation. Exceptional circumstances raised after the meeting and any decision on the outcome of
an investigation will not normally be taken into account at a later date.
The ACO or the Academic Conduct Panel is entitled to ask for other evidence from the student(s),
including access to emails, or documents on personal file stores if they wish to determine the truth in
any allegation. They may also meet with other members of the University or ask for evidence from
others. As set out in section 7.1, students are entitled to request a copy of any relevant evidence
obtained by the investigator(s) which influences the final outcome of the investigation.
At the conclusion of the investigation, the ACO or Academic Conduct Panel will recommend that the
relevant Director of Education or Director of Research either dismiss the allegation, or that they
uphold it and recommend the penalty to be applied. Where the Director of Education or Director of
Research makes a decision to impose a different penalty to that recommended by the ACO/ACP
they must provide a rationale for doing so. A written confirmation of this decision, along with a clear
explanation of the misconduct and guidance for future avoidance will also be provided to the
student(s) at the end of the process, to outline and explain any decisions made. Where an allegation
has been dismissed, the ACO or Academic Conduct Panel may choose to recommend a Poor
Academic Practice Notice be issued to the student, should the allegation instead constitute poor
academic practice and meet the criteria as set out in Appendix C.
Upheld allegations of academic misconduct will be reported to the Board of Examiners (taught
students) or thesis examiners (research students).

Version 3.2 August 2026

Handbook: Academic Misconduct

22

The student(s) will be asked whether they accept the decision, or whether they wish to request a
review of it, on the grounds that they believe it is unfair (taking into account the grounds for Stage 3
Reviews as set out in section 10)5. If the student(s) does not respond within 20 working days it will
be assumed that they have accepted the outcome (and any resulting penalty) and they will not be
entitled to request a review of the decision. After the 20 working days has elapsed they will be sent a
completion of procedures letter by the Student Casework Team.
Course Director or Review Panel Chair constructs an evidence-based case for Academic Misconduct.
They then send the completed Stage 1 Academic Misconduct Form (AMF) to the Student Casework Team.

DoE/DoR decides whether to consider case or refer it to an ACO or the Academic Conduct Panel
(ACP)
ACP

ACO
Staff in the Student Casework team contact the
student to outline the allegation and invite the
student to attend a meeting with an ACO. ACO
reviews AMF and supporting evidence.
ACO meets with the student or otherwise considers
the evidence submitted by the student.

ACO completes AMF (including any
recommendation) and sends to DoE/DoR for
approval. Student Casework send a copy of the
approved AMF to the student.

Staff in the Student Casework team contact the
student to outline the allegation and invite the
student to the next Academic Conduct Panel
meeting. They are also asked to present written
evidence.
ACP meets with the student or otherwise considers
the evidence submitted if they cannot attend.

ACP completes AMF (including any
recommendation) and sends to DoE/DoR for
approval. Student Casework send a copy of the
approved AMF to the student.

The student is then required to inform in writing whether they accept the recommendation, or otherwise wants to
request a review of the decision and submit a Stage 3 request.

If the student is found guilty of academic misconduct and accepts the decision of the relevant
Director of Education or Research, they should discuss the outcome with their Course Director or
Supervisor to see how it impacts the remainder of their studies. For example, they may advise that
the student will need to pass the remaining elements of their course, or that the Director or
Education or Research will consider whether the student is allowed to resit the piece of work
associated with the academic misconduct.
Appendices A and B provide the range of penalties that the ACO or Panel will recommend for taught
and research students respectively. Appendix D outlines what adjustments to the above process will
take place if the student is based outside of the UK.
The decision of the Director of Education or Director of Research will be considered as the final
decision at Stage 2, with any penalty applied immediately. Students retain the right to request a
review of any decision made at Stage 2.

5 Students may only request a review of a decision they believe is unfair and the grounds set out in section 10

are met, not if they believe the penalty applied is unfair.

Version 3.2 August 2026

Handbook: Academic Misconduct

23

10 Stage 3 – Review
The University takes allegations and their investigations extremely seriously and acts in an
appropriate manner to ensure that fairness for all parties is maintained throughout. It will likely
assert that decisions arising from an investigation have been the result of a fair and thorough
investigation and are based on evidence provided by the parties concerned.
Students have the right to request a review of any decision arising from a Stage 2 investigation, but
only under specific circumstances. These are:
A.

that the decision of the Academic Conduct Officer, Academic Conduct Panel or Director of
Education or Director of Research was based on incomplete or inaccurate evidence, to the
extent where it is reasonable to conclude that the decision may have been different;

B.

that the Academic Conduct Officer, Academic Conduct Panel or Director of Education or
Director of Research were prejudiced or biased against the student, including any
undisclosed conflicts of interest.

Students may not request a review because they do not like the outcome, or because they believe
the penalty is unfair or disproportionate to the offence. (Students retain, however, the right to
complain about the University to the Office of the Independent Adjudicator for Higher Education –
see section 11 – External Complaint).
Any request must:
(a)

be submitted in writing within the twenty working day deadline stated in the letter or report
confirming the outcome of the Stage 2 investigation;

(b)

state clearly which of the grounds A and/or B above are relevant to the request;

(c)

provide a clear statement of the background for the review request, and evidence to support
this statement;

(d)

outline a preferred outcome or solution for any investigator to consider.

Please note that any request may be dismissed summarily by the Academic Registrar if:
(a)

the student has not provided sufficient evidence to support the stated grounds of review; or

(b)

it does not conform to the permitted grounds of review; or

(c)

it is submitted out of time.

The Academic Registrar can only do this after consulting the Pro-Vice-Chancellor (Education &
Research) on the circumstances, and only with their agreement. The Academic Registrar will
confirm with the student in writing if their request is dismissed.
If accepted for investigation, a Stage 3 review will be conducted by an Academic Conduct Panel
(made up of at least three Academic Conduct Officers, who were not part of any panel which
considered the case at Stage 2).
If a student has any concerns that any member of the Academic Conduct Panel is too familiar with
the case to undertake the investigation, this should be raised as soon as possible with the Head of
Registry Services, who will consider whether an alternative investigator should be appointed. If a
student remains unsatisfied, they should contact the Academic Registrar, through
academicmisconduct@cranfield.ac.uk.

Version 3.2 August 2026

Handbook: Academic Misconduct

24

The Academic Conduct Panel will review the initial Stage 2 investigation, taking into account any
further evidence or commentary. On completion of the Stage 3 review investigation, the student will
be provided with a report, including a decision and the reasons for it, as well as a completion of
procedures letter for a dismissed outcome. For an upheld or partially upheld outcome, students may
request a completion of procedures letter. The Academic Conduct Panel may decide:
(a)

to dismiss the review; or

(b)

to fully or partially uphold the review and recommend an alternative decision and penalty.

In considering any Review, the Panel may determine that a different penalty should be applied for
the academic misconduct in question, or determine that a different type of academic misconduct
took place (as set out in section 2 of this Handbook) and recommend application of a relevant
penalty.
The recommended outcome of any Stage 3 investigation will be considered and confirmed by the
Pro-Vice-Chancellor (Education & Research)as appropriate. The decision of the University at that
point would be considered final.
Upheld allegations of academic misconduct will be reported to the Board of Examiners (taught
students) or thesis examiners (research students).

Version 3.2 August 2026

Handbook: Academic Misconduct

25

11 External complaint
At the completion of Stage 3, the University will consider any decision it has made to be final and
complete, with no further right of appeal. This is equally true if any request for a review that a
student has made is dismissed summarily, or if the student has no grounds for review.
If a student, however, remains dissatisfied with the outcome or with how the University has
managed the allegation and its subsequent investigations, they have the right to submit a complaint
against the University to the external regulator for the UK higher education sector, the Office of the
Independent Adjudicator for Higher Education (OIA).
More information about the OIA can be found at www.oiahe.org.uk
In order for the student to use the OIA, the University must agree that they have exhausted the
internal procedures. This is managed by the Academic Registrar issuing a “completion of
procedures letter” to the student.
Students may request from the Academic Registrar a “completion of procedures letter” if they have
not escalated the matter to the next stage and are out of time to do so. The letter will explain that
you have not completed our internal procedures and the reason that you are unable to do so.
Students may also request from the Academic Registrar a “completion of procedures letter” if their
Stage 3 review was upheld or partially upheld by contacting academicmisconduct@cranfield.ac.uk.
Please note that the OIA will not consider any complaint from a student unless a “completion of
procedures letter” has been provided and will usually reject cases which have not completed a
provider’s internal processes.
Any complaint to the OIA must be registered within twelve months of the University issuing a
“completion of procedures letter”.

Version 3.2 August 2026

Handbook: Academic Misconduct

26

Appendix A: Penalties applied following an upheld
allegation of academic misconduct - Taught
students
The following penalties are appropriate for taught course students.
If a student is sponsored by the Defence Academy (Ministry of Defence, UK), the University will
share personal data, academic progress data, and data relating to any instances of misconduct with
the Defence Academy. This may result in independent action taken by them towards the student.
The below categories of academic misconduct give penalties for first and subsequent offences; this
refers to first and second offences of academic misconduct. Unless otherwise stated below a
student will be considered to have committed a second offence of academic misconduct having
previously been found guilty of a first offence, regardless of the categories of either offence, and
shall be penalised accordingly.
The person(s) responsible for recommending a penalty to either the relevant Director of Education
or Director of Research or Pro-Vice-Chancellor Education & Research may use their academic
judgement in selecting the most appropriate penalty within the bounds of those specified below (as
set out for each category of misconduct). If an offence of academic misconduct is confirmed the
student must receive one of the penalties specified.
For any student found guilty of academic misconduct:
• where the offence was deemed severe enough to warrant more than a warning, they should
be given zero for that assessment. Students who are required to re-sit or revise and
represent an assessment will be considered to have failed to meet the minimum mark (and
failed to achieve the associated learning credits) at their first attempt.
• They may only be given an opportunity to re-sit or to revise and represent an assessment (in
whole or in part) providing that the assessment in question is that student’s first attempt (or
considered as their first attempt) at that assessment - Students cannot, due to academic
misconduct, re-sit or revise and represent an assessment they have previously failed
at the first attempt.
• if they are undertaking a re-sit or resubmission (for whatever reason), they cannot be
afforded a further re-sit or resubmission on the grounds of having committed academic
misconduct.
A penalty recommending a resit or resubmission will usually be disregarded where the penalty will
benefit a student, such as where a student fails an assessment without the automatic option to resit
or resubmit (i.e. it was their second (or classed as their second) attempt at the assessment or they
have reached the permissible number of resits available to them. In such cases the outcome
communicated to the student would be a mark of zero with no resit opportunity, which would likely
lead to failure of their intended award
For modules with more than one independent taught assessment the offences and penalties relate
to the assignment/examination/group project in question, not the module as a whole. Where
academic misconduct takes place in an element of a multipart assessment6 the penalty will be
applied to that element. The categories of modules with more than one taught assessment, and the
implications of failures in each case can be found in the Senate Handbook: Assessment Rules.
Academic Conduct Officers/Panels should ensure they are aware of these implications if a
suspected assignment is part of such a module.

6 From September 2021 multipart assessments are no longer offered as part of courses, except in cases

where a student has deferred an assessment or is completing a resit from prior to this date.

Version 3.2 August 2026

Handbook: Academic Misconduct

27

Plagiarism (not acknowledging sources, improper or incomplete referencing and self
plagiarism/duplication)
and/or
Collusion7
The table below indicates the categories and available penalties for plagiarism and collusion. The
proportion of the assessed work which has been affected by plagiarism and/or collusion
categorises the appropriate penalty, not the Overall Similarity Index score. The percentage of
the submitted work considered affected will be decided by the investigators as a result of the
investigation into an allegation of academic misconduct, with a corresponding penalty applied.
When applying penalties for plagiarism and collusion Academic Conduct Officers or Academic
Conduct Panels may, at their discretion, afford students who have previously been found guilty of a
first offence of high or medium level plagiarism or collusion, a further first offence if they are
subsequently found guilty of low-level plagiarism.
LOW
LEVEL

<10% of
examination/assignment
affected

In the case of a first offence:
a) written warning or
b) a mark of zero, with examination/assignment re-sit
opportunity, capped at 50% (40% for UG students) or
c) a mark of zero, with revise and represent opportunity,
capped at (40% for UG students)
For a second or further offence: 8
1.

MEDIUM
LEVEL

10-33% of
examination/assignment
affected

a mark of zero, with examination/assignment re-sit
opportunity, capped at 50% (40% for UG students) or
2.
a mark of zero, with revise and represent opportunity,
capped at 50% (40% for UG students)
In the case of a first offence:
a) a mark of zero, with examination/assignment re-sit
opportunity, capped at 50% (40% for UG students) or
b) a mark of zero, with revise and represent opportunity,
capped at 50% (40% for UG students)
For a second or further offence:⁵

HIGH
LEVEL

>33% of
examination/assignment
affected

a mark of zero, with no automatic entitlement to a re-sit
opportunity (i.e., the Director of Education will consider the
student’s overall mark portfolio before a re-sit opportunity is
permitted, and will have the right to fail the student outright
for their award)
In the case of a first offence:
a) a mark of zero, with no automatic entitlement to a re-sit
opportunity (i.e., the Director of Education will consider the
student’s overall mark portfolio before a re-sit or revise and
represent opportunity is permitted, and will have the right to
fail the student outright for their award)
For a second or further offence: ⁵
a) a recommendation of termination of registration on the
grounds of lack of due diligence in their studies

7

8

The percentages in column 2 of the table refer to the percentage of the submitted work rather than relating
to the Overall Similarity Index. The percentage of the submitted work considered affected may change as a
result of the investigation into an allegation of academic misconduct.
The timing of any second offence should be taken into consideration: if the identification of the first offence
was confirmed to the student after the occurrence of the second offence, this may result in a “first offence”
penalty being applied for a second time.

Version 3.2 August 2026

Handbook: Academic Misconduct

28

Where a student is undertaking a re-sit or resubmission (i.e. not taking an assessment as a first
attempt) they cannot be given a penalty of a further re-sit or resubmission.
Please note that plagiarism and collusion may also be interpreted by an Academic Conduct Officer
or panel as one of the other forms of academic misconduct listed below. In such cases, the
alternative penalty may be applied (see below).
Intending to deceive the examiners
and/or
Cheating under test conditions
In the case of a first offence:
a) written warning or
b) a mark of zero, with examination/assignment re-sit opportunity, capped at 50% (40%
for UG students) or
c) a mark of zero, with revise and represent opportunity, capped at 50% (40% for UG
students)
For a second or further offence: ⁵
a) a mark of zero, with no automatic entitlement to a re-sit or revise and represent
opportunity (i.e., the Director of Education will consider the student’s overall mark
portfolio before a re-sit opportunity is permitted, and will have the right to fail the
student outright)

Falsification/Fabrication of experimental or other investigative results
and/or
Using another person to produce or complete an assessment
and/or
Theft of another student’s work
In the case of a first offence:
a) a mark of zero, with no automatic entitlement to a re-sit or revise and represent
opportunity (i.e. the Director of Education will consider the student’s overall mark
portfolio before a re-sit opportunity is permitted, and will have the right to fail the
student outright)
For a second or further offence: ⁵
a) a mark of zero, with a recommendation of termination of registration on the grounds
of lack of due diligence in their studies

Version 3.2 August 2026

Handbook: Academic Misconduct

29

Appendix B: Penalties applied following an upheld allegation of academic misconduct Research students
The below table details the penalties that may be applied following an upheld allegation of academic misconduct against a research student at any stage of
their research and are applicable for any work produced.
If a student is sponsored by a partner organisation or outside funding body, the University may be required to share personal data, academic progress data,
and data relating to any instances of misconduct with the partner. This may result in independent action taken by them towards the student.
The person(s) responsible for recommending a penalty may use their academic judgement in selecting the most appropriate penalty within the bounds of
those specified below. If an offence of academic misconduct is confirmed the student must receive one of the penalties given below. More than one penalty
may be applied.
A recommended penalty may be disregarded where the penalty will benefit a student (i.e. where a student fails their award, but the recommended penalty is a
revise and represent opportunity, the original fail would still stand).
Where the penalty given to a student is an opportunity to re-sit or to revise and resubmit they may only do so providing they have not already been granted a
revise and represent opportunity for that piece of work (for any reason).
Please note: for research students undertaking taught modules as part of their research programme, any upheld allegations of academic misconduct detected
as part of those taught modules will be penalised according to the penalties for taught students as set out in Appendix A.
The below table details where a penalty is:
recommended
potentially appropriate
potentially appropriate in exceptional circumstances
not appropriate

Version 3.2 August 2026

Handbook: Academic Misconduct

30

Penalty

Poor
Academic
Practice
warning:
Deputy
Director of
Research

Ethics /
Academic
Misconduct
Training

Amend problematic
sections and resubmit
for examination within a
specified period. (Prior
to examination, including
or excluding the
problematic sections)

Misconduct

Formal
warning letter
from the ProVice
Chancellor:
Education &
Research

Transfer
Registration
to a lower
award

Examiners
instructed to
consider only the
non-problematic
sections of the final
submission. May
grant the degree for
which the thesis has
been submitted

Examiners
instructed to
consider only the
non-problematic
sections of the final
submission. May
grant a lower award
only.

Termination of
registration

Rescind
Award

Self-plagiarism/ duplication
(minor, 1st offence)
Plagiarism: improper or
incomplete referencing (minor,
1st offence)
Plagiarism: not acknowledging
your sources (minor, 1st
offence)
Failure to apply for ethical
approval
Plagiarism (2nd offence or
major)
Using another person to
produce the work/defend the
thesis at viva
Falsification/Fabrication of
experimental or other
investigative results
Theft of another student’s work

Undertaking unethical
research
Academic Misconduct
detected following a Revise
and Represent outcome.
Academic Misconduct
detected post-award

Version 3.2 August 2026

Handbook: Academic Misconduct

31

Appendix C: Poor Academic Practice
Poor Academic Practice may occur where a student demonstrates a lack of understanding of
academic practice and where the offence is unintentional. It is not considered to be academic
misconduct.
A Poor Academic Practice Notice may be given as an outcome of any Stage 1 or Stage 2
investigation into academic misconduct, where the investigator does not feel that a student’s actions
constitute academic misconduct but that they have demonstrated either poor academic practice or a
lack of understanding of good academic practice in their submitted work.
Poor Academic Practice may occur where a student demonstrates a lack of understanding of
academic practice and where the offence is unintentional, such as:
•
•
•
•
•
•

Material or copied text expressing ideas or concepts taken from the work of others, in the
student’s own words but without appropriate citation;
Material or copied text which is referenced in the bibliography but is not properly cited;
Misunderstanding the boundaries and/or limitations of working with other students, as
evidenced by structure, source or use of the same original texts; this includes cases where
the written work is original throughout;
Plagiarism caused by poor referencing;
Poor paraphrasing;
Unintentional inappropriate use of AI tools.

Poor Academic Practice Notices should only be issued where the submitted work in question is
considered to be assessable without the affected section(s) of the work being taken into account.
Students may only receive one poor academic practice warning (except in cases where a student
submits a second piece of work prior to the notification of poor academic practice in an earlier piece
of work). Any subsequent cases of poor academic practice, or further offence (if previously been
found guilty of academic misconduct for the same offence), of academic misconduct following the
process set out in this Handbook. In addition, a student who has been previously found guilty of
committing academic misconduct through the formal investigation process detailed in this Handbook
cannot later be issued with a poor academic practice warning - any subsequent case of academic
misconduct must be considered formally as a second or further offence.
During the course of a Stage 1 informal investigation, a Course Director or Supervisor may
determine that any alleged offence constitutes poor academic practice, providing it falls within the
criteria given above. If this is the case, the Course Director or Supervisor will discuss the matter with
the student, issue a written warning and complete the form available on the Hub, to be forwarded to
the correct SAS Lead. The fully completed and signed paperwork will be submitted to the Student
Casework Team who will add it to the student’s record. In addition a Poor Academic Practice Notice
may be issued following a Stage 2 investigation where the allegation is not upheld. Any upheld
allegation of academic misconduct at Stage 2 must be penalised as per Appendix A.
In all cases of poor academic practice, a student will receive a written warning that is held on their
student record. Students will be made aware that any further instances of poor academic practice
will be deemed to amount to academic misconduct and penalised as per the penalties listed in the
Academic Misconduct Handbook. Students will also be given feedback on how to avoid poor
academic practice in future work and, in cases of plagiarism, be required to complete an on-line
learning module. In addition to the written warning students may be asked to resubmit the piece of
work with any relevant corrections. The original mark will remain, and it would not be classed as a
further assessment attempt.
To ensure the process operates effectively and consistently, Registry Services will track cases of
poor academic practice as reported by academics centrally so that course teams/investigators have
the information they need to manage each case and to be aware of any previous warnings.

Version 3.2 August 2026

Handbook: Academic Misconduct

32

Appendix D: Arrangements for students based
outside of the UK
The University has a number of academic partnerships that result in students being based outside
the UK. This appendix sets out the process for considering cases of academic misconduct in these
circumstances. Course Directors or Supervisors are responsible for ensuring that academic
partnership students are provided with equivalent levels of support and information on the
University’s regulations on academic misconduct as those based on the University’s campuses.
The Course Director or Supervisor will inform the Student Casework team of potential cases of
academic misconduct who will decide if the case should be referred to an Academic Conduct Officer
or Academic Conduct Panel (ACP). Where it is decided that the case should be referred to an ACP,
the student should be informed of this in writing. For cases that it is decided can be dealt with by a
single Academic Conduct Officer (ACO), the ACO will aim to meet with the student online, or
alternatively they will ask the student to submit a written response to the allegation and will ensure
that the student has access to this Handbook and to appropriate support services. If the student is
unable to discuss the allegation with the ACO it is important that a written response is submitted, as
this will be the only opportunity to put forward the student’s side of the case.
Once the ACO has considered the case they will ask the Director of Education or Research to
approve their recommendation, and then the Student Casework Team will inform the student (in
writing) of the recommendation. The student will be required to confirm whether they accept or
contest the ACO’s recommendation. Failure to return the form by the stated deadline (twenty
working days) will be interpreted by the University as acceptance of the recommendation.
If the Director of Education or Director of Research refers the case to the ACP in the first instance,
or if the student contests the ACO’s recommendation, the Academic Registrar (or a member of their
staff) will contact the student to make arrangements for the panel meeting. The meeting will take
place via telephone or online and the student will be accompanied by at least one senior
representative from the partner institution. The role of staff from partner institutions is to act as an
observer, to offer technical support with web facilities, and to provide input to the meeting if the
student wishes them to (in the same way that a student based on campus might ask a module
leader or Course Director to attend a meeting with them). In accordance with the University’s
procedures, a single person chosen by the student may also accompany the student to the panel
meeting, in the role of a ‘friend’ as described above in section 7.3, provided that the Academic
Registrar is notified in advance.
The student’s availability and differences in time zones will be taken into account when organising
panel meetings, however it may be necessary for the panel to request that a written response be
submitted if it is not possible to agree a mutual date. The Panel will make a recommendation to the
Director of Education or Research (Stage 2) or the Pro-Vice Chancellor Education & Research
(Stage 3) for approval. The Academic Registrar will be responsible for informing the student and the
academic partner of the final decision. The Academic Registrar will also provide the student with the
external appeals procedure of the Office of the Independent Adjudicator.

Owner
Department
Implementation date
Approval by and date
Version number and date of last review
Next review by

Version 3.2 August 2026

Academic Registrar
Academic Excellence
August 2026
Academic Registrar, August 2026
Version 3.2; August 2026
July 2027

Handbook: Academic Misconduct

33
