Academic Integrity and Misconduct Policy
1. Overview
1.1

The academic activity and reputation of DMU (the University) is founded on the
principles of integrity, honesty and trust. All staff and students are expected to
uphold these principles in their academic work. We require the work that you
submit for assessment to be entirely your own and that you always
acknowledge the use of any other sources in referencing conventions relevant
to your academic discipline as set out by the University. We also require that
you comply with the University’s assessment regulations, including those
relating to conduct in examination or test conditions.

1.2

Academic misconduct occurs where you do not act with academic integrity and
honesty. It is an action you take, accidentally or with intent, that has the
potential to give you an unfair advantage in your assessment, or which might
assist another student to gain unfair advantage. This policy sets out broad
definitions of academic misconduct, including those relating to the use of
Artificial Intelligence, and the actions that we will take in response to academic
misconduct under the provisions of the Academic Integrity and Misconduct
Disciplinary Procedure.

1.3

Penalties given, if an allegation of academic misconduct is upheld, range from
the requirement to engage in extra learning support through to expulsion from
the University. The penalties will be dependent on any prior history of academic
misconduct, the nature of the misconduct and the level of intent you showed to
gain advantage. The type of penalties we apply are provided in Annex 1. If you
are studying on a programme that leads to a qualification that includes the right
to practice in a particular profession (e.g. nursing) and a case of academic
misconduct against you is upheld, a penalty may also result in a referral to the
relevant Professional Statutory Regulatory Body (PSRB) which may prevent you
from practice in that profession.

1.4

This policy applies to all students studying at DMU and to those studying
programmes at partner institutions leading to an award from DMU. The specific
nature of the Academic Integrity and Misconduct Procedure may vary if you are
studying at a partner institution and will be included in your Programme
Handbook. Where there is variation, the University is responsible for ensuring
that the principles of the partner institution’s procedure align with what is
required for a DMU award. Where there is ambiguity regarding an aspect of
academic misconduct, the University’s policy will apply.

1
Academic Integrity and Misconduct Policy

2. Support
2.1

The University provides all students with education and support in
understanding good academic practice and therefore how to avoid academic
misconduct. As a minimum, this includes:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

2.2

Referencing
Skills and Assignments
Workshops, Drop-ins & Tutorials
Using Generative Artificial Intelligence
Good Academic Practice
BaseCamp
Introduction to Good Academic Practices

The University recognises that there will be different reasons why you may
resort to actions that would constitute academic misconduct The University has
resources and processes in place should you find that you have specific
concerns about your assessments, or matters such as your academic success,
your wellbeing, or pressure from other people. We strongly advise that you talk
to a member of staff or to the Students’ Union at the earliest opportunity to gain
the support you may need rather than resorting to actions that would constitute
academic misconduct.

3. Academic Misconduct Definitions
3.1

The following section sets out DMU’s definitions of academic misconduct. These
definitions are broadly common across the UK Higher Education sector. Some
of these definitions may not be the same as those you experienced at school,
college or in countries other than the UK. It is therefore critical that you read the
definitions set out below and ask a member of staff if you have any doubts or
questions about their meaning. If you are studying in a partner institution
located in a country other than the UK, these definitions still apply to you.

3.2

Poor Academic Practice
Poor academic practice is, typically, inappropriate use of a referencing system
and unintentionally passing off work as your own at a minor scale. Poor
academic practice may arise from a lack of understanding of how to produce a
piece of work or assessment due to lack of experience or understanding.
Examples include but are not limited to:

2
Academic Integrity and Misconduct Policy

•

where a small part of an assignment appears to convey
ideas, data or other information obtained from other sources
as if it was your own word for word duplication of up to a few
sentences in written work, oral presentations or comparable
duplication in non-written forms where the source is not
mentioned.

•

Unattributed quotations

More than two instances of poor academic practice may be considered as
intentional acts of academic misconduct.
3.3

Plagiarism
Plagiarism is your intentional action to present work, data or concepts (including
drafts and work in progress) as your own when it derives from another source
(including from Artificial Intelligence which is not declared as agreed in your
project brief), and from which you attempt to gain advantage. Examples of
plagiarism include but are not limited to:
•

Substantial or continuous duplication of phrases including
where word-substitution has been used to disguise the
original source’ and word-for-word duplication of phrases of
sentences in written work or oral presentations

•

Substantial duplication of components from another source
in creative arts submissions

•

Using the views, opinions of another source without
acknowledgement

•

Copying the style (e.g. parody, pastiche, homage) of another
person without referencing the significance of the source

•

Paraphrasing work obtained from a published source and
passing this off as your own.

3
Academic Integrity and Misconduct Policy

3.4

Contract Cheating and the use of Artificial Intelligence (AI) Generated Content
Contract cheating is your intentional action to engage with a third party (for
example AI) to undertake some or all your assessment for you which you then
submit and pass off as your own and attempt to gain advantage. Contract
cheating includes:
•

Engaging with an ‘essay mill’ or essay writing service that
may or may not involve a financial exchange between you
and that third party. The UK Government criminalised ‘essay
mills’ in 2022 and their operations are therefore illegal.

•

Asking any other person to contribute, or undertake in full,
an assessed piece of work. This includes but is not limited to
asking other students, friends, family, private tutors and
copyediting services.

•

Engaging with AI tools to contribute, or undertake in full, a
piece of work to be assessed.

Use of Artificial Intelligence (AI) tools such as ChatGPT and similar platforms is
increasingly commonplace in many parts of education and society and as a tool,
and if used wisely, it has many valuable uses. However, the use of AI in
assessed pieces of work without prior approval, will constitute intentional
academic misconduct where you:
•

Plagiarise information from AI sources without appropriate
referencing

•

Engage in a form of contract cheating through using an AI
tool to generate your work

•

Falsifying information resulting from the AI tool you use

•

Use an AI tool to improve your use of the English language
in your assessment submission without referencing this in
line with referencing guidelines

•

Use an AI tool to substantially amend or improve your
assessment

4
Academic Integrity and Misconduct Policy

•

Undertake any other action using AI which constitutes
academic misconduct

The only exception to the above would be if the assignment brief itself required
the use of AI as part of the process of the assessment. In this case, the use of
AI would be permitted but limited in scope to the exact requirements of the brief,
and the use of AI in other parts of the assignment not covered by the brief would
be considered to be an academic offence.
3.5

Collusion
Collusion is an intentional action whereby the assessment task requires you to
submit your own work, but where you and another student/s liaise to inform one
or both submissions. For clarity, any student involved in collusion is taking an
intentional act to either advantage another student and/or advantage
themselves and are therefore engaging in academic misconduct. Collusion
includes, but is not limited to, the following actions:
•

Providing another student/s with part or all the material that
will form the assessment submission, including any draft
work.

•

Uploading any part of the work that will form your
assessment to a site, including via social media, and external
plagiarism checkers, through which another student/s could
gain access.

•

Using material provided by another student/s within your
assessment submission without acknowledging the student/s
by appropriate referencing and submitting it as your own.

•

Paraphrasing the work of another student and submitting it
as your own

•

Planning an assessment response together with another
individual

5
Academic Integrity and Misconduct Policy

•

You are responsible for the security of your work. For
example, if you leave a device unlocked while away from
your desk and another student takes advantage of your
absence to copy your assignment from the device - then if
there is no clear evidence of theft, this will be treated as
collusion.

Collusion should not be confused with collaborative/group learning and peer
support where you may share ideas for e.g. books or articles that you may use
to inform your assessment/s. However, unless the assessment task
requirements instruct you to plan, organise and compile the task in a group, you
must plan, organise and compile your assessment without the involvement of
another student/s.
3.6

Cheating in Examination or Test Conditions
Examination or test conditions are put in place as a specific tool to uphold
academic integrity and maintain fairness. This includes examinations and tests
that are delivered on-campus (including partner campuses) or on-line. Cheating
in examination or test conditions is your intentional attempt to gain advantage,
for you and/or for another student/s, by taking one or more of the following
actions:
•

Attempting to acquire or acquiring advance knowledge of the
content of an examination or test before it is issued to you

•

Attempting to communicate or communicating with other
student/s or other individual (other than an invigilator) in
relation to or during the assessment, including through
technology and social media.

•

Discussing or sharing, or attempting to discuss or share,
assessment content or related information with another
student/s or other individual during the examination time
period.

•

Attempting to copy, or copying from the examination script
of another student

•

Allowing another student to attempt to copy or copy from
your examination script

6
Academic Integrity and Misconduct Policy

3.7

•

Providing information to another student in an examination
or attempting to do so

•

Obtaining, or attempting to obtain, any other assistance from
another student

•

Using, or attempting to gain access to, any material not
permitted as part of the assessment

•

Accessing, or attempting to access, any electronic or
technological device during an examination that is not
permitted by the University

•

Impersonating another student or allowing another student
or any other individual to impersonate you

•

Refusing to comply with a reasonable request made by a
member of University staff where they suspect potential
misconduct

•

Any other action that you take with the intention of gaining
unfair advantage

Acquiring and submitting work that is not produced by you
Submitting work that has been substantially amended or improved by a third
party (to include amendments or improvements made by the use of an AI tool),
and submitting it as yours is your intentional action to gain advantage. This
includes but is not limited to:
•

Submitting work produced in part or in full by someone other
than you (including the submission of work produced by AI
tools).

•

Submitting work that has been substantially amended or
improved by someone other than you or by an AI tool

•

Submitting work where the English Language (or the
language specified for assessment) has been amended by
someone
other
than
you,
by
language
generation/enhancement software or websites or by an AI
tool.

7
Academic Integrity and Misconduct Policy

3.8

Fabrication and/or falsification of information
Falsification or fabrication of information means that you have intentionally used
information within your assessment that is not real. This includes but is not
limited to:
•

Claiming to carry out experiments, observations, interviews,
data collection or any other form of research when you have
not done so.

•

Creating false data

•

Referencing work that does not include the information you
claim it does

•

The inappropriate manipulation and/or selection of data or
imagery with the intent to convey a false impression of the
information actually used.

•

Using information gained from an AI tool that may not provide
you with real information

•

Creating false references from an AI tool

•

Creating or obtaining information illegally

8
Academic Integrity and Misconduct Policy

3.9

Re-using previously assessed material
You are not permitted to use all or part of a piece of work for assessment that
you have submitted previously for a different assessment, whether this is in your
current programme or for submission at any other institution. Doing so would be
an intentional action to gain advantage. The only exceptions to this position are
where:
•

You use short quotations from a previous assignment in the
assessment task which are fully referenced

•

You are repeating a year or resitting an assessment task that
requires you to improve upon your previous submission
(including formative/interim submissions) and the Module
Leader agrees to the inclusion of parts of your previous
work.

•

Where a resubmission is being made for the same
component in the same module, and the where the
assessment brief has not substantially changed’ for that
component have not changed.

3.10 Ethics
You are required to follow the correct procedures for undertaking research,
including for ethical approval. Failure to not comply with the University’s
research ethics requirements (Code of Practice) is an intentional action that
constitutes academic misconduct. Additionally, here you can find further
guidance on the university’s ethics policies.

9
Academic Integrity and Misconduct Policy

4. How DMU Identifies Potential Academic Misconduct
4.1

During the assessment process, your work will be scrutinised for evidence of
academic misconduct. For written work, the University will use on-line tools
such as Turnitin to provide staff with a level of information about how you have
used external sources. The member of staff will then use that information to
assess how matches have occurred and to determine if they have any concerns
about potential academic misconduct.

4.2

Within an examination or test condition, your paper will be scrutinised for any
evidence of academic misconduct. In examination or test conditions any
misconduct, including that relating to your behaviour, will be reported and
followed up.

4.3

A student can report another student for alleged or actual academic
misconduct, however anonymous reports cannot be investigated. You will not
be disadvantaged by the University in any way by reporting the alleged or actual
misconduct of another student. We strongly encourage you to talk to a member
of staff or the Students’ Union if, despite this assurance, you have a misconduct
allegation that you do not feel you can raise. If you make a misconduct
allegation against another student solely on malicious grounds, we will consider
taking disciplinary action against you.

4.4

The University uses the Academic Integrity and Misconduct Procedure to
investigate and respond to reports of alleged misconduct.

5. Confidentiality
5.1

The University aims to manage academic misconduct allegations confidentially.
It will be necessary for a limited number of people to know the details of the
allegation for it to be identified/investigated. Depending on the stage of the
Academic Misconduct Procedure, these people will include staff who
administer, identify or manage the allegation, who undertake the investigation,
are named in the allegation, are witnesses to the matters it raises, are part of a
panel that considers the allegation or who are asked to review an appeal against
a misconduct outcome.

10
Academic Integrity and Misconduct Policy

6. Dignity and Respect
6.1

All students and staff engaging with the Academic Integrity and Misconduct
Procedure must behave with dignity and respect for each other and in
accordance with the University’s values and the Equality Act 2010. The process
will be halted if unreasonable or disrespectful behaviours occur. The University
may make use of the Student Misconduct and Disciplinary Policy if behaviour
constitutes misconduct.

7. Graduation
7.1

You will not be permitted to graduate from the University if there is an on-going
investigation into your alleged academic misconduct.

8. Revisiting academic misconduct cases
8.1

In upholding the principles of integrity, honesty and trust, we will revisit cases
of academic misconduct that have been previously dealt with and completed if
substantively new and credible evidence comes to our attention. We will always
undertake further investigation where the evidence relates to serious academic
misconduct that would be considered by an Academic Misconduct Panel and/or
that relates to fitness to practice. We may also undertake further investigation
for other forms of academic misconduct.

9. Misconduct identified after graduation
9.1

We will investigate serious academic misconduct after you have graduated if
substantively new and credible evidence is brought to our attention. In
undertaking that investigation, we will invite you to attend a meeting of the
Academic Misconduct Panel which can also meet in your absence. Under the
General Regulations, the University can revoke the award of a degree where a
case of serious misconduct is upheld. If you have a right to practice within a
particular profession, we will also notify the relevant professional body if a
serious case of misconduct is upheld.

11
Academic Integrity and Misconduct Policy

10.

Context

10.1

This Academic Integrity and Misconduct Procedure will be used to investigate
and respond to any reports of academic misconduct and is designed to be fair,
proportionate and transparent.

10.2

It will normally be a member of staff who identifies potential or actual
misconduct in a student’s work. However, as set out in the Academic Integrity
and Misconduct Policy, a student may also report the alleged academic
misconduct of another student.

10.3

It can be distressing and stressful to have an allegation of academic misconduct
made against you. Your wellbeing during any such processes remains of
paramount importance and you can seek wellbeing support from Student
Services or from your own community services. There are also confidential
helplines available Are you in crisis now? (dmu.ac.uk). The Students’ Union is
available to provide you with confidential and independent help and advice.

10.4

The Academic Integrity and Misconduct Procedure sets out the normal
timescales for each stage. We will let you know if we are unable to meet the
published timescale and the reason why.

10.5

We will make relevant reasonable adjustments to the operation of this
procedure should you require this in relation to a declared disability.

10.6

In each Faculty there will be an Academic Practice Officer who is a senior
member of staff responsible for overseeing academic integrity and academic
misconduct matters.

10.7

APOs will meet regularly to discuss and ensure consistency of approach

10.8

If the nature of your alleged academic misconduct also indicates an issue of
behavioural misconduct (which is addressed in the Student Disciplinary
Procedure), we will decide the most appropriate way in which to address both
matters proportionately and fairly and will inform you of our decision.

10.9

If the nature of your alleged academic misconduct leads us to have concerns
about your Fitness to Study or Fitness to Practice, we will decide the most
appropriate way to address these matters and will inform you of our decision.

12
Academic Integrity and Misconduct Policy

11.

Identifying potential academic misconduct

11.1

Where a member of staff suspects that there is academic misconduct in your
assessment, they will gather initial evidence to support that position and will
inform the Module Leader. For research degree students, the supervisor should
inform the Faculty Head of Research Students and the APO.

11.2

Where a member of staff or invigilator suspects or identifies academic
misconduct within examination or test conditions, they will compile a report of
what they witnessed and provide that to the Module Leader.

11.3

Where a student suspects or identifies the academic misconduct of another
student in an examination or test setting, they must inform a member of staff or
invigilator. If a student suspects or identifies academic misconduct of another
student in any other setting or wishes to make a report outside the examination
or test setting, they should inform the Module Leader or the Faculty Head of
Research in the case of research degree students.

11.4

For taught programmes, the Module Leader will make an initial assessment of
whether the reported potential misconduct is:
•
•
•

Poor academic practice or
Academic Misconduct or
Unclear whether it is poor academic practice or academic
misconduct

11.5

A module leader may seek advice from an Academic Practice Officer where it is
unclear if a potential case of academic misconduct has taken place.

11.6

If it is not clear as to whether the conduct is poor academic practice or academic
misconduct, the Module Leader will refer the matter to the Academic Practice
Officer for a decision.

11.7

For research degree programmes, the initial assessment will be made by the
Faculty Head of Research Students.

13
Academic Integrity and Misconduct Policy

12.

Investigation Report

12.1

The Academic Practice Officer will ensure that an appropriate investigation
report is completed. This task will be undertaken by the Faculty Head of
Research Students for research degree students in collaboration with the APO.

12.2

In compiling the investigation report, a check will be made as to whether you
have any declared disabilities or reasonable adjustments agreed with the
University so that these can be noted and are relevant to the allegation.

12.3

Once the report has been compiled, we will:
•

Notify you that we are investigating possible academic
misconduct in your assessment/s.

•

Provide you with the evidence that supports the misconduct
allegation

•

Confirm our initial assessment of the type of misconduct we
are investigating

•

Confirm the date and time we wish to meet with you, or state
when we will be confirming that information.

•

Remind you that support is available from the Students’
Union in relation to the allegation, and from Student Services
should you need support with your wellbeing.

•

Provide you with a link to the Academic Integrity and
Misconduct Policy and the Academic Misconduct
Procedure.

14
Academic Integrity and Misconduct Policy

13.

Process for addressing poor academic practice

13.1

Where the evidence shows that the misconduct is due to your poor academic
practice, you will be invited to a meeting to discuss the allegation and to hear
your response. If this is your first instance of poor academic practice, the
meeting will be held with the Module Leader. If it is your second or more
instance, the meeting will be held with the Academic Practice Officer. In the
case of research students, the meeting will be held with the Faculty Head of
Research Students and the APO. You will be given five university days’ notice
of the meeting which can be held in person or online via Microsoft Teams or
Zoom.

13.2

You are entitled to be accompanied to the meeting by a Student’s
Companion The ‘Student’s Companion’ means a member of the academic Staff
of the University (if appropriate), or a registered Student of the University, or a
member of the Students’ Union Advice Team. The role of the companion is to
offer support during formal panel meetings. It is not expected that the
companion will need to speak during the investigation or the panel meeting,
unless by prior agreement. Meetings and hearings held under this procedure
are not legal forums, neither the University nor the Student are permitted to be
represented by legal practitioners. ‘The Student’s Companion’ can only be a
legal adviser in circumstances where the Student’s Fitness to Practise is in
question (see the Fitness to Practise Policy). In this instance, the University will
also have a legal adviser present. Trade Union representation is not permitted
at Fitness to Practise panels.

13.3

We strongly advise you to attend the meeting to help support your learning.
However, you may choose
•

not to attend the meeting and/or

•

make written representations, including any mitigation you
consider relevant.

Where you choose not to attend, the consideration of your case will go ahead
in your absence.

15
Academic Integrity and Misconduct Policy

13.4

Following the meeting or consideration of your case, we will determine:
•

Any additional work that you need to undertake or support
that is required to help you to avoid poor practice in
subsequent assessments

•

For taught programmes, the mark penalty that may be
applied to the assessment in which the poor practice was
identified

•

For research degrees the mark penalty that may be applied
to the assessment in which the poor practice was identified

13.5

You will be notified by email of the outcome of the meeting within ten university
working days.

13.6

Up to two instances of poor academic practice will be addressed through this
process. If you submit work with poor academic practice in any further
submissions, this will normally be addressed through the process for addressing
academic misconduct.

16
Academic Integrity and Misconduct Policy

14.

14.1

Process for addressing alleged academic misconduct
(Departmental Academic misconduct Hearing or Academic
Misconduct Panel)
Alleged academic misconduct will be addressed through either:
•

A Departmental Academic Misconduct Hearing or

•

For the most severe cases, an Academic Misconduct Panel.
The University’s definition of severe cases is set out in point
42.

14.2

The Academic Practice Officer will determine which process will be used
dependent on the nature of the case. This task will be taken by the Faculty Head
of Research Students for research degree cases. Advice will be taken from the
Head of ASO to ensure that this decision aligns with consistency across the
University.

14.3

Departmental Academic Misconduct Hearings and Academic Misconduct Panel
will consider your case on the balance of probability and standard of proof. This
means that for the University to uphold an allegation of misconduct, we need
to show sufficient evidence that either the misconduct occurred or is likely to
have occurred. The balance of probability is the standard of proof required of
us by the UK Office of the Independent Adjudicator), the body that sets out
expectations of all higher education institutions. Please be aware that these are
not legal proceedings, rather they are internal mechanisms for ensuring that the
University maintains academic integrity.

14.4

The processes below set out how the University will manage cases that involve
one student. Please see points 62 to 66 for information about how we manage
cases involving more than one student, for example, in the case of alleged
collusion.

17
Academic Integrity and Misconduct Policy

15.

Departmental Academic Misconduct Hearing

15.1

The Departmental Academic Misconduct Hearing will be led by the Academic
Practice Officer, or in the case of research degree students, by the Faculty Head
of Research Students.

15.2

You will be given five university days’ notice of the meeting which can be held
in person or online via Microsoft Teams or Zoom.

15.3

If the academic misconduct allegation questions whether the work you
submitted was solely authored by you, you may also be required to attend an
oral examination or practical test prior to or as part of the Departmental
Academic Misconduct Hearing. The purpose of that examination or test will be
to establish your familiarity with the content of the work. If the University decides
that this action should form part of the process, you will be given at least five
university working days’ notice.

15.4

You are entitled to be accompanied to the Departmental Academic Misconduct
Hearing meeting by a Student’s Companion. The ‘Student’s Companion’ means
a member of the academic Staff of the University (if appropriate), or a registered
Student of the University, or a member of the Students’ Union Advice Team.
The role of the companion is to offer support during formal panel meetings. It is
not expected that the companion will need to speak during the investigation or
the panel meeting, unless by prior agreement. Meetings and hearings held
under this procedure are not legal forums, neither the University nor the Student
are permitted to be represented by legal practitioners. ‘The Student’s
Companion’ can only be a legal adviser in circumstances where the Student’s
Fitness to Practise is in question (see the Fitness to Practise Policy). In this
instance, the University will also have a legal adviser present. Trade Union
representation is not permitted at Fitness to Practise panels.

15.5

We strongly advise you to attend the meeting to help support your learning and
to state your response to the allegation. However, you may choose (i) not to
attend the meeting and/or (ii) make written representations, including any
mitigation you consider relevant. Where you choose not to attend, the
consideration of your case will go ahead in your absence.

15.6

The Departmental Academic Misconduct Hearing will consider the evidence of
alleged academic misconduct and the response you have to the allegation,
including any mitigation. A record of the hearing will be made and shared with
you for information and correction of matters of fact.

18
Academic Integrity and Misconduct Policy

15.7

Within ten university working days of that meeting, the outcome will be
confirmed in writing. The outcome of the meeting will be one of the following:
•

There is insufficient evidence to show - on the balance of
probabilities- that academic misconduct occurred, and no
further action will be taken

•

You admit misconduct and an associated penalty will be
provided

•

There is sufficient evidence to show that - on the balance of
probabilities - academic misconduct occurred, and, for
taught programmes, an associated penalty will be provided.

•

Your case will be referred to an Academic Misconduct Panel
because there is evidence that the academic misconduct is
severe, and a more significant penalty will be required.
Where there is any evidence of academic misconduct by a
research degree student, this will be referred to the Academic
Misconduct Panel.

•

Exceptionally, and in response to matters raised in the
meeting, if further investigation is required, a follow-up
meeting will be held with you once that investigation has
concluded. This follow-up process will normally conclude
within ten university working days of you being notified and
you will receive a further written outcome which will normally
be one of the outcomes listed above.

15.8

The penalty awarded from a Departmental Academic Misconduct Hearing will
take account of the nature and scale of the academic misconduct, your
response to the findings and any mitigating circumstances that are relevant to
the case. Appendix 1 provides a guide to the type of penalties that may be
given. You will be given a reason for the penalty that has been awarded.

15.9

The Assessment Board for your programme will be informed of the outcome
from the Departmental Academic Misconduct Hearing and any associated
penalties will be ratified at that Board. If you are a research student, the
Research Degrees Committee will be informed and any associated penalties
will be ratified at that Committee.

19
Academic Integrity and Misconduct Policy

15.10 If you disagree with the outcome or penalty, you may appeal the decision on
the following grounds:
•

The University procedure
appropriately, or;

has

not

been

followed

•

There is new information/evidence that was not reasonably
available before; or

•

The process has not operated in accordance with the
Equality Act 2010

15.11 You must submit any appeal in writing within 10 days of receiving the written
outcome of the Hearing. Your appeal should be sent to the Academic Support
Office at scs@dmu.ac.uk and its receipt will be acknowledged in writing within
five working days.
15.12 Your appeal will be reviewed by the Director of Registry Services who will
either:
•

Dismiss the appeal if there are insufficient grounds or

•

Refer the case to two Academic Practice Officers (not
involved in the original case) for review. The Academic
Practice Officers will report back to the Director of Registry
Services with a recommendation and the decision of the
Director of Registry Services will be final.

15.13 You will be notified in writing of the outcome of your appeal within 20 working
days of its original submission. If you are dissatisfied with the outcome of your
appeal, you may refer your case to the Office of the Independent Adjudicator
for Higher Education (OIA). More information about the role of the OIA can be
found here (Office of the Independent Adjudicator for Higher Education OIAHE) and will be provided in your appeal outcome letter.

20
Academic Integrity and Misconduct Policy

16.
16.1

Academic Misconduct Panel
The Academic Misconduct Panel will consider repeated instance of academic
misconduct and severe cases of alleged academic misconduct, penalties for
which may lead to expulsion from the University. Severe cases of alleged
academic misconduct are classified by your level of intent to deceive the
University to gain advantage. This includes but is not limited to:
•

Any form of contract cheating including the unreferenced use
of AI in assessment

•

Impersonating, or allowing someone to impersonate you in
any assessment

•

Obtaining access to an examination paper or test before it is
formally issued to you

•

Failing to obtain ethical approval before conducting research

•

Extensive collusion between students

•

Obtaining information illegally

•

Stealing the work or another student or individual.

•

Any form of alleged academic misconduct by a research
degree student

16.2

A case will always be referred to an Academic Misconduct Panel if there is full
or partial evidence that the alleged misconduct is severe.

16.3

The Academic Support Office is responsible for forming an Academic
Misconduct Panel. It will be scheduled within 20 working days of you being
informed that it will meet, and you will receive the same written information
about the case that is received by the Panel at least ten university working days
in advance of the meeting. The Panel meeting can be held in person or online
via Microsoft Teams or Zoom.

21
Academic Integrity and Misconduct Policy

16.4

16.5

The role of the Panel is to:
•

Review the investigation report and any supporting
documentation that both you and the panel have received.

•

Hear from the Academic Practice Officer or nominated
academic, or Faculty Head of Research Students, who will
present the case.

•

Meet with you to hear your response to the findings and any
mitigating circumstances you wish to present

•

Hear from witnesses that may be called by you or by the
University

•

Ask questions

•

Determine the outcome and any penalty which will take place
without your presence. The penalty should take account of
any mitigating circumstances you present to the Panel.

•

You will be informed of the outcome at the end of the panel
hearing.

The Academic Misconduct Panel will comprise the following people who must
not have had any prior involvement with your case:
•

A Pro Vice-Chancellor, Dean, Deputy Dean or Associate
Dean, Academic who will chair the panel.

•

A member of the Students’ Union Executive Committee

•

A member of academic staff who has been trained in the
academic misconduct process or who has experience of such
cases. For cases involving a research student/s, this member
of staff shall be from the University’s Research Degrees
Committee.

•

The Director of Registry Services or their nominee

22
Academic Integrity and Misconduct Policy

16.6

If you are studying on a programme that leads to a qualification that includes
the right to practice in a particular profession (known as Fitness to Practice e.g.
nursing), the Panel will inform the Fitness to Practice lead that you have been
referred to an Academic Misconduct Panel. This is because if a case of
academic misconduct against you is upheld, you may also lose the right to
practice in that profession. The details of the additional requirements
under Fitness to Practice panel can be found here Fitness to Practice

16.7

You are entitled to be accompanied to the Academic Misconduct Panel meeting
by a Student’s Companion.

16.8

We strongly advise you to attend the meeting to help support your learning and
to state your response to the allegation. However, you may (i) choose not to
attend the meeting and/or (ii) make written representations, including any
mitigation you consider relevant. Where you choose not to attend, the
consideration of your case will go ahead in your absence. A record of the
proceedings will be taken and you will be provided with a copy for information
and corrections of matters of fact.

16.9

Within five university working days of that meeting, the outcome will be
confirmed in writing. The outcome of the meeting will be one of the following:
•

There is insufficient evidence to show - on the balance of
probabilities - that academic misconduct occurred, and no
further action will be taken

•

You admit misconduct and an associated penalty will be
provided

•

There is sufficient evidence to show that - on the balance of
probabilities - academic misconduct occurred, and an
associated penalty will be provided.

•

Exceptionally, and in response to matters raised in the
meeting, if further investigation is required, and a follow-up
meeting will be held with you once that investigation has
concluded. This follow-up process will normally conclude
within ten university working days of you being notified and
you will receive a further written outcome which will normally
be one of the outcomes listed above.

23
Academic Integrity and Misconduct Policy

16.10 The penalty determined by an Academic Misconduct Panel will take account of
the nature and scale of the academic misconduct, your response to the findings
and any mitigating circumstances that are relevant to the case. Appendix 1
provides a guide to the type of penalties that may be given. You will be given a
reason for the penalty that has been awarded.
16.11 You will be notified of the outcome of the Academic Misconduct Panel verbally
at the end of the panel hearing, and this will be followed by confirmation in
writing, normally within five university working days of the hearing.
16.12 The Assessment Board for your programme will be informed of the outcome
from the Departmental Hearing. If you are a research student, the Research
Degrees Committee will be informed. Your academic profile will be updated
with the outcome of the Academic Misconduct Panel.
16.13 If you disagree with the outcome or penalty, you may appeal the decision on
the following grounds:
•

The University procedure
appropriately, or;

has

not

been

followed

•

There is new information/evidence that was not reasonably
available before or

•

The process has not operated in the context of the Equality
Act 2010

16.14 You must submit any appeal in writing within ten university days of receiving
the written outcome of the Panel. Your appeal should be sent to Student
Casework Services scs@dmu.ac.uk and its receipt will be acknowledged in
writing within five university working days.

24
Academic Integrity and Misconduct Policy

16.15 Your appeal will be reviewed by the Director of Registry Services who will
either:
•

Dismiss the appeal if there are insufficient grounds at which
point you may pursue your case with the Office of the
Independent Adjudicator (OIA) Office of the Independent
Adjudicator for Higher Education - OIAHE or,

•

Refer the case to an Academic Misconduct Appeals
Committee which will be set-up to consider your case and
will comprise the following people who must not have been
involved in the original Academic Misconduct Panel or been
previously consulted about the case. The Committee will
comprise, a Pro Vice-Chancellor or a Dean or a Deputy Dean
or an Associate Dean, Academic who will act as chair, a
member of the Students’ Union Executive Committee and a
member of the Academic Board.

16.16 Where an appeal proceeds, the Academic Support Office is responsible for
setting-up the Academic Misconduct Appeals Committee. It will be scheduled
within 20 university working days of you being informed that it will meet, and
you will receive the same written information about the case that is received by
the Panel at least ten university working days in advance of the meeting.
16.17 You are entitled to be accompanied to the appeal meeting by a Student’s
Companion.
16.18 The purpose of the appeal hearing is to:
•

Review the case that you have put forward in relation to the
grounds for appeal

•

Meet with you for you to present your case and to answer
any questions

•

Hear from witnesses that may be called by you or by the
University

•

Determine the outcome from the hearing

•

Verbally confirm the outcome to you

25
Academic Integrity and Misconduct Policy

16.19 Within five university working days of that meeting, the outcome will be
confirmed in writing. The outcome of the meeting will be one of the following:
•

The appeal is dismissed due to insufficient grounds and the
original outcome from the Academic Misconduct Panel is
confirmed or

•

The appeal is upheld and the original outcome from the
Academic Misconduct Panel is changed, and a new outcome
is confirmed.

16.20 You will be notified in writing of the outcome of your appeal within five university
working days of its original submission. If you are dissatisfied with the outcome
of your appeal, you may refer your case to the Office of the Independent
Adjudicator for Higher Education (OIA). More information about the role of the
OIA can be found here Office of the Independent Adjudicator for Higher
Education - OIAHE and will be provided in your appeal outcome letter.

17.

Cases involving more than one student

17.1

The University will use the same principles set out in this procedure where the
alleged academic misconduct involves more than one student.

17.2

The Departmental Hearing or the Academic Misconduct Panel will be used to
ensure that there is a fair and equal opportunity for both or all parties to be
heard individually before any decisions are reached.

17.3

The University will schedule the Departmental Academic Misconduct Hearing
or the Academic Misconduct Panel in fairness to both or all students (e.g. ideally
on the same day). The same people should be involved in the consideration of
the case for each student involved.

17.4

In allegations of collusion, it is important to note that the University’s definition
shows intent by both or all parties involved in such an act because the action
ultimately results in one or more students gaining advantage.

26
Academic Integrity and Misconduct Policy

17.5

Where an allegation is upheld and there is evidence to show that both or all
students have engaged in misconduct, the Departmental Academic Misconduct
Hearing or the Academic Misconduct Panel must ensure broad consistency of
approach in the penalties that it applies. Any differentiation will normally be due
to differences in individuals’ mitigating circumstances or differences in
admission of the offence.

Created: June 2018
Originating Directorate: Registry Services
Updated by: Joseph Parmar
Approved by: Academic Board
Date of approval: June 2023
Effective date: July 2024
Due for review: June 2025

27
Academic Integrity and Misconduct Policy
