Academic Regulations
Appendix 8:
Academic Misconduct
Procedures
2024 – 2025

1. 1

Academic Misconduct Procedures
Contents
Academic Misconduct Procedures…………………………………………………………….2
Summary………………………………………………………………………………………….3
Glossary of Terms ………………………………………………………………………………3
Purpose…………………………………………………………………………………………...3
Regulations……………………………………………………………………………………….4
1.General Provisions.......................................................................................................... 4
2.Definitions Relating to Academic Misconduct ................................................................. 5
3.Types of Academic Misconduct ...................................................................................... 6
4.How Academic Misconduct Impacts Assessment ........................................................... 8
5.How we deal with academic misconduct in coursework .................................................. 9
6.How we deal with Academic Misconduct in a timed examination.................................. 12
7.Student requests for an Academic Misconduct Panel ................................................... 13
8.Academic Misconduct Panel ......................................................................................... 13
9.Panel Outcomes ........................................................................................................... 15
10.How we will Communicate with you during the Academic Misconduct Process. ........ 17
11 Timeframes ................................................................................................................. 17
12. Appeals ...................................................................................................................... 17
13.Office of the Independent Adjudicator (OIA) ............................................................... 18
Key to Relevant Documents

19

Annex A – The principles of oral investigation (viva)……………………………………….20
Annex B – Classifications and sanctions …………………………………………………....21
Annex C – Overview of Academic Misconduct Procedure………………………………...24
Annex D – Agenda for Academic Misconduct Panel……………………………………….25
Endmatter

26

1. 2

Summary
Appendix 8 describes the process by which the University details, investigates and deals
with allegations of academic misconduct. We define academic misconduct as ‘an
attempt to gain an academic advantage over other students by the use of unfair and/or
unacceptable methods.’ Academic misconduct undermines academic integrity and is a
serious academic offence that could result in your withdrawal from the University.

Glossary of Terms
There are no surprising terms in this document.

Purpose
This document is aimed primarily at students (‘you’) and details the University’s (‘our’,
‘we’) approach and procedure for dealing with academic misconduct. It includes the
process the University will follow where academic misconduct is suspected or
committed. A student guide is also available which provides more operational detail
including information on academic integrity and how to avoid academic misconduct.
There is an operational guide for staff to aid consistent implementation of these
regulations.
These regulations apply to all Edge Hill students except those studying on postgraduate
research programmes, who are subject to Research Degree Regulations.

1. 3

Regulations
1.

General Provisions

1. Academic integrity is essential to the continued success of the University. It
underpins the quality of our teaching, qualifications, research and ultimately the
University’s reputation. These Academic Misconduct Regulations are designed to
support the maintenance of academic integrity for the benefit of all members of
the University community.
2. By ‘academic integrity’ we mean a commitment to the values of honesty, trust,
fairness, respect and responsibility, and the courage to act on them in the face of
adversity. This is the definition advocated by the International Centre of Academic
Integrity (ICA) and is the definition used by Turnitin.
3. When you submit your assessments, you are asked to confirm that the work is
your own and by doing so agree that you have maintained academic integrity.
4. We are all responsible for maintaining academic integrity. The purpose of these
regulations is to ensure you are fully aware of the process the University will
follow if you are suspected of Academic Misconduct.
5. The University provides information, advice and support to ensure you
understand how to maintain academic integrity in your work. This is available at
induction sessions and in handbooks, codes of practice, policies and similar
documents which you will be provided with or directed to by the University at
induction. Training is also available through UniSkills.
6. It is your responsibility to ensure you are aware of all the available information
regarding the maintenance of academic integrity. You are also responsible for
being aware of and understanding the different types of Academic Misconduct
and the consequences of offending.
7. You are expected to maintain academic integrity throughout your studies and to
seek advice or support if you are unsure of how to do this. Advice and support is
available from your academic department and Learning Services.
8. Ignorance of these procedures, guidelines on referencing or the
acceptable/ethical use of computer-generated support is not an acceptable
defence for misconduct.
9. You are responsible for guarding your work against unauthorised access by
others, both before and after assessment. The requirement for academic integrity

1. 4

continues to apply even after you have graduated. This means that sharing your
work with future students could result in misconduct on both your parts.
10. These regulations follow the Good Practice Framework published by the Office of
the Independent Adjudicator (OIA). They are refreshed annually and reviewed
every three years (see end matter of this document for details).

2.

Definitions Relating to Academic Misconduct

1. We define academic misconduct as activity which is likely to have the effect of
gaining an academic advantage by the use of unfair and/or unacceptable
methods.
2. This definition applies whether or not intent can be proven. The University does
not distinguish between intentional and unintentional misconduct.
3. ‘Unfair and/or unacceptable’ methods includes all forms of cheating, influencing,
unauthorised use of a third party and any other activity likely to undermine
academic integrity.
4. ‘Assessed work’ includes any form of assessment which does not constitute a
formal examination. This includes coursework, in-course tests and Time-Limited
Assessments (TLAs).
5. ‘Formal examination’ refers to examinations that are timed and subject to ongoing
invigilation.

1. 5

3.

Types of Academic Misconduct

1. Academic Misconduct may include:

Plagiarism
Presenting someone else’s work or ideas as your own. This includes representing
the work of another student or institution as your own, or presenting work generated
by, but unattributed to Artificial Intelligence (AI). Examples include (but are not
limited to) the following:
•

•
•
•

Verbatim copying or insertion of another’s work without appropriate
acknowledgement. This includes published or unpublished work and material
freely available in electronic form or generated by AI.
The close paraphrasing of another’s work by simply changing a few words or
altering the order of the presentation, without appropriate acknowledgement.
Unacknowledged quotation of phrases from another’s work or unreferenced
work generated by AI.
The deliberate and detailed presentation of another’s concept as your own.
This includes unauthorised AI-generated concepts.

Self-plagiarism
Submitting the same (or substantially the same) work that you have already
submitted for another assessment, when this is not permitted.

Collusion
Working with someone else on an assessment which is intended to be your own
work. It also includes the following:
• Collaborating with another student to complete work which you know they
intend to submit as their own.
• Knowingly permitting another student to copy all or part of your work and
allowing them to submit that work as their own unaided work.
Please note, you may be found guilty of collusion if you did not take the appropriate
steps to protect your work from others.

Cheating in examinations (or other formal assessment)
This is an infringement of the rules governing conducting examinations or other
formal, time-constrained assessment. It includes the following:
• Communicating with or copying from any other student during an examination,
except where specifically permitted, for example, in-group assessments.
• Communicating during an examination with any person other than an
authorised invigilator or other authorised member of staff.

1. 6

•

•
•
•

Possession of any unauthorised material in an examination room, whether
written, printed or electronically stored, unless expressly permitted by the
regulations for the module or in-course assessment.
Gaining access to any unauthorised material relating to an examination during
or before the specified time.
Providing or helping to provide in any other way, false evidence of knowledge
or understanding in examinations.
Arranging for someone else to sit an examination on your behalf (also known
as 'impersonation’).

Contract Cheating
This is where a third party (including a person or AI) completes work on your behalf
which you then submit as your own unaided work. This includes the use of essay
mills or buying work online. It may also incorporate other forms of Academic
Misconduct such as cheating, plagiarism or collusion as defined by the University.
Payment does not have to be made for contract cheating to occur.
The University has outlined what it considers to be acceptable and unacceptable
use of AI. This is detailed in the AI Toolkit for Students which is published on the
Virtual Learning Environment. You are responsible for familiarising yourself with this
information. Unacceptable use of AI may fall into any of the definitions of Academic
Misconduct listed in this document.

Falsifying data or material
This includes the following:
• Falsifying the data or material presented in reports or any other assessment.
• Falsely claiming to have undertaken experimental or experiential work or to
have obtained such data by unfair means.
• The fabrication of references or a bibliography.

Breaches of research and ethical policies
These include the following:
• Evasion of ethical responsibilities.
• Failure to gain ethical approval.
• Careless and irresponsible research practice.
• Conducting research without appropriate permissions
• Any other ethical issues which contravene the University’s Research Ethics
Policy.
• Where ethical misconduct is suspected, the Head of Department (or their
nominee) will report this directly to the Associate Dean of Faculty with
responsibility for teaching, learning and assessment.

1. 7

Ethical matters relating to professional programmes, including breaches of GDPR
in assignments, may be handled through another process (for example, fitness to
practise). In some cases, they may require reporting to the relevant Professional,
Statutory or Regulatory body (PSRB).

Other forms of Academic Misconduct
Other forms of Academic Misconduct may include (but are not limited to) the
following:
• Submitting fraudulent personal circumstances claims or falsifying evidence in
support of personal circumstances or academic appeal claims. This may also
be considered a non-Academic Misconduct matter.
• Attempting to obtain special consideration by offering or receiving
inducements or favours; that is, bribery.
• Ensuring the non-availability of books or journal articles in the University
library by removing the relevant article or chapter from the material, or
deliberately mis-shelving them so that other students cannot find them.
• Taking a copy of another student’s work without their permission (theft).
2. The types of academic misconduct defined in this document are indicative, not
exhaustive. The University reserves the right to deem that academic misconduct
has occurred in instances that are not explicitly defined in this document.

4.

How Academic Misconduct Impacts Assessment

1. These regulations apply to the preparation, presentation and submission of all
assessed work, irrespective of the element, method or form of the assessment
concerned.
2. If you are suspected of Academic Misconduct, you will be considered innocent
until proven guilty. You will normally be allowed to progress with your academic
studies during any investigation unless professional body regulations preside.
Decisions about attending placements will be made on a case-by-case basis by
your Head of Department (or their nominee).
3. However, an Assessment Board will not normally confirm your results until any
investigation or misconduct panel has been completed and an outcome reported.
4. If evidence of Academic Misconduct becomes available after an Assessment or
Award Board decision, that Board has the authority to reconsider its original
decision. Please see Appendix 24 – Revocation of Awards for more details.

1. 8

Personal Circumstances or other concurrent processes.
5. If you have approved Personal Circumstances (PC) for the assessment(s) under
investigation, you must make this known as soon as you are contacted about
suspected Academic Misconduct.
6. If you have undeclared personal circumstances which you believe mitigate your
misconduct, you must make these known as soon as you are contacted about
suspected misconduct. You should also submit a formal declaration of personal
circumstances, in line with the PC procedures.
7. Personal circumstances, whether approved before or after Academic Misconduct
is proven, will not supersede an Academic Misconduct outcome. However, we
may be able to take your circumstances into account when determining which
sanction to apply if misconduct is proven.
8. If you are found guilty of misconduct in an assessment for which you have an
approved PC, your assessment will not be ‘Deferred’ and the PC will not apply to
any subsequent sittings for that assessment. However, if you are found guilty of
misconduct on your final attempt, for which you have an approved PC, you will
normally be allowed another final attempt unless the offence is so serious that the
Panel recommend your withdrawal from the University. This provision relates to
the opportunity to submit the assessment only. Any other sanctions, for example
capping the module, will still apply.
9. Where there is a case of Academic Misconduct, the University will follow these
procedures through to their conclusion regardless of any concurrent activity, for
example, submission of a PC.
10. If you are on a Regulated Programme, proven Academic Misconduct may bring
into question your fitness to practise in your chosen profession. In such cases, we
may invoke the University’s Fitness to Practise Procedures and/or report the
activity to the relevant external body as appropriate in the circumstances.

5.

How we deal with academic misconduct in coursework

Stage 1 – Allegation and Initial Assessment
1. Where the marker of a piece of assessed work suspects Academic Misconduct
has occurred, they will immediately advise the module leader, misconduct lead or
equivalent. If both parties suspect Academic Misconduct, you will be invited to an
informal meeting with your tutor or lecturer.
1. 9

2. This initial meeting is your opportunity to explain how you produced your
assessment and demonstrate that the work is your own or explain if it is not. You
may be asked some general questions about your assessment. At this meeting
you should also highlight any mitigating circumstances or confirm if you have an
approved PC.
3. This meeting will result in one of the following outcomes:
•
•

•

No academic misconduct has occurred. No further action will be taken.
Poor academic practice has been found. You will be required to attend and
undertake the appropriate UniSkills workshop(s) to enable you to learn and
prevent recurrence.
Academic misconduct is suspected. You will be advised that academic
misconduct is suspected, and an investigation will take place to determine
whether academic misconduct has occurred.

Stage 2 – Investigation and Establishing a Case
4. Where academic misconduct is suspected and cannot be resolved at the informal
stage, you will be called to a formal departmental misconduct meeting to discuss
your work. The investigation may also include any of the following:
• A review of the submission and marking.
• A second marking procedure, where appropriate and practical.
• An oral investigation or ‘viva’. This may be used where there is reasonable
doubt that your submission is your own work. There are more details on
the viva process in Annex A.

Departmental Meeting
5. At least five working days before the meeting takes place you will receive a
written invitation to the meeting. This will include the date, time, location and
purpose of the meeting and any evidence of the alleged misconduct.
6. You have the right to be accompanied to this meeting by a friend. Please read
Appendix 23 (Role of a Student’s Friend) for more details. This will be explained
to you in your invitation to the meeting.
7. The following people will be present at the meeting:
• First marker.
• Module/programme leader, Academic Misconduct Lead or equivalent.

1. 10

The meeting will be documented, and a record kept by a note taker. The Faculty
Assistant Registrar may also attend to provide advice and guidance on the
Academic Regulations.
8. If you do not attend the departmental meeting, it may proceed in your absence.
Similarly, if you make unreasonable attempts to delay the meeting it may proceed
in your absence.
9. At the meeting, the Chair will explain their suspicions and provide a copy of the
evidence. You will then have the opportunity to respond to the allegations.
10. If you have not already disclosed mitigating/personal circumstances or that you
have an approved PC, it is in your best interest to do so at this point.
11. When you have presented your case and left the meeting, the departmental
representatives will discuss whether they believe you have committed an offence.
They will consider all relevant discussion from the meeting, any evidence
presented and any personal circumstances or concurrent processes they are
aware of.
12. Classification of Academic Misconduct is a matter of academic judgement in
relation to the alleged offence. Whether an offence is a first or subsequent
offence may impact how it is classified.

Determining the outcome and classifying offences
13. Academic Misconduct outcomes are determined by the programme/module
leader, misconduct lead or equivalent, in conjunction with the Head of
Department. One of the following outcomes/classifications will be applied
following an investigatory meeting:
• No offence committed
• Poor academic practice (no offence committed)
• First or subsequent minor offence
• First or subsequent major offence
• First or subsequent grave offence.
Examples of each of these classifications are listed in Annex B.
14. Where it is established that no offence has been committed, your department will
inform you of this outcome in writing. No further action will be taken.
15. Where it is established that poor academic practice has occurred, but no offence
has been committed, you will be advised of next steps in writing. This will include
a requirement to attend one or more UniSkills workshops.
1. 11

16. If it is found that misconduct has been committed, the department will establish
the level of offence and determine the most appropriate outcome in line with the
list of classifications and associated sanctions in Annex B of this document.
17. With the exception of Grave offences (which must be referred to an Academic
Misconduct Panel), your department may take any personal or other mitigating
circumstances into account when making their decision.
18. You will be notified of the meeting outcome in writing. This will explain the
classification of the offence and details of which sanction the department will
apply. Depending on the severity of the misconduct, the department may decide
that the appropriate outcome is to refer your case to an Academic Misconduct
Panel. All Grave offences will be referred to an Academic Misconduct Panel.

Your options if you are dissatisfied with the outcome
19. If you are dissatisfied with the outcome of the departmental meeting or have
experienced any mitigating circumstances which have not been considered, you
may request to present your case to an Academic Misconduct Panel. There are
details of how to do this in Section 7 of this document.

6.

How we deal with Academic Misconduct in a timed examination

1. If an Invigilator suspects that any form of cheating has occurred in an
examination, they will:
• inform you of their suspicions and intention to report the incident
• confiscate any relevant evidence, such as any unauthorised material
• ask you to remove any unauthorised device from your desk, put it in a
clear plastic bag and place it under the desk
• where possible, have the above steps witnessed by a second invigilator
• annotate your script and state on the front cover the point at which the
alleged cheating was identified
• return the script to you and permit you to continue with the examination
and conclude at the normal stipulated time
• record this activity on the invigilator’s examination report form.
2. Should the above procedure lead to unreasonable disturbance or disruption to
examination conditions, or where the procedure is invoked for a second time in
the same examination, the invigilator may:
• expel you from the examination room
• appropriately adjust the duration of the examination for other candidates.

1. 12

3. The invigilator will record their actions in their examination report so that marking
tutors are aware of any disturbance or disruption to other students.
4. The invigilator will submit their written report to the Head of Student Casework
and relevant Head of Department no later than three working days after the
examination. The report will include the time of the incident, your response to the
allegation and any relevant supporting evidence including any confiscated
materials.
5. Where possible the report will include the comments and signatures of any other
invigilators present at the time of the alleged cheating. The examination script will
be marked by the relevant marker and made available to an Academic
Misconduct Panel.
6. Where an invigilator/marker uncovers a case of suspected cheating after an
examination has been completed, they will follow the steps above as soon as
possible and thereafter follow the standard procedure. In such cases, the formal
report on the matter should be submitted within three working days of the case
being established, rather than three working days of the examination.
7. Suspected misconduct in a formal examination is considered a Grave offence
and, in all cases, will be referred directly to an Academic Misconduct Panel.

7.

Student requests for an Academic Misconduct Panel

1. If you do not accept the local outcome agreed by the Head of Department, you
have the right to present your case in person before an Academic Misconduct
Panel.
2. To request a panel, you should complete a request form and submit this to the
Head of Student Casework within 10 working days of being notified of your
outcome.
3. The process and standards described in Section 8, below, apply whether you
request the misconduct panel, or whether it is brought by the University.

8.

Academic Misconduct Panel

1. The Student Casework Team convenes all Academic Misconduct Panels and will
communicate with you throughout the process. The communication process is
described at the end of this section.

1. 13

2. The role of an Academic Misconduct Panel is to make an independent decision
on whether Academic Misconduct occurred and take appropriate action based on
the evidence presented.
3. To ensure a fair hearing takes place, the University has a set process which all
Academic Misconduct Panels follow. This process is detailed in Annex C to this
document, in the form of an agenda.
4. You will receive written notice of the Panel meeting at least 10 working days
before it takes place. The notice will detail the allegation and the date, time and
venue for the Panel. You will also receive a copy of these regulations and
information about your right to be accompanied to the meeting by a friend. Please
see Appendix 23 for details on the Role of a Student’s Friend.
5. Prior to the hearing, you will receive a pack which includes a copy of all the
documentation sent to the Panel members. Alternative arrangements will be
made for you to view any material which is not in written format.
6. You are expected to attend the Panel meeting. In exceptional cases, such as
verifiable illness, the Head of Student Casework may agree to reschedule the
meeting at your request. However, if you have been given sufficient notice of the
date and time of the Panel and do not attend, the meeting may go ahead in your
absence. The decision to continue in your absence will be made by the Head of
Student Casework.

Panel Composition and Procedures
7. The Panel will comprise the following:
• Chair – this will be a Dean or Associate Dean of a Faculty other than your
own, or a Dean of Service.
• Two other members of academic staff who have no previous direct
involvement with you.
• A representative of the Students’ Union.
8. The Head of Student Casework (or their nominee) may attend to provide
information, advice and guidance about the Academic Misconduct Regulations. A
note taker will also attend. These attendees are not part of the decision-making
process.

Terms of Reference and Panel Process
9. The Academic Misconduct Panel has the following terms of reference:

1. 14

•
•
•
•

To investigate the allegation of malpractice, having regard to the evidence
presented to it by both staff and student.
To determine whether misconduct occurred and its severity.
Where misconduct is proven, to determine the outcome in line with the
offences and sanctions listed in Annex B.
To inform the student and relevant Assessment Board of their decision.

10. To ensure fair and consistent meetings, the University follows a set agenda,
outlined in Annex C.
11. You will be notified in writing of the Panel’s decision within five working days of
the meeting. We will also report the Panel’s decision to the relevant Assessment
Board.

9.

Panel Outcomes

1. Having considered all the evidence available, the Panel will decide whether
Academic Misconduct has occurred. You will be notified of this decision in writing
within five working days of the meeting.
2. If the Panel’s conclusion is that no misconduct occurred, you may still be required
to attend one or more academic integrity workshops. This will be explained in the
outcome letter.
3. If the Panel’s conclusion is that Academic Misconduct did occur, a sanction must
be applied.
4. Academic Misconduct constitutes a wide range of possible infringements, levels
of gravity and possible sanctions. Therefore, when deciding the severity of the
misconduct and appropriate sanction, panel members will consider the
circumstances surrounding the case. This includes:
•
•
•
•
•

the intent to deceive in order to gain academic advantage
the scale and extent of the act
any subsequent elements to the offence
the nature of any theft of academic material
the extent to which any verifiable mitigating circumstances may have
impacted on the student.

5. Where there is evidence of personal or other mitigating circumstances, the Panel
has the discretion to impose a lesser sanction than normally recommended. Any
adjustment to a sanction must be proportionate in the circumstances and
documented.
1. 15

6. The Panel may also decide to refer you to another University procedure where
appropriate.
7. In all cases, continuing students will be provided with support around academic
integrity.

Academic Misconduct Within a Regulated Programme
8. If you are on a Regulated Programme and are found guilty of Academic
Misconduct, the normal sanction for that offence will be applied. You may also be
subject to other University procedures, for example, Fitness to Practise.
9. In certain circumstances, the relevant PSRB may need to be informed before or
after any University sanction is imposed. This may result in the PSRB imposing a
different or additional sanction to that recommended by the University.

Reassessment after Academic Misconduct
10. The Academic Regulations detail the University’s approach to reassessment and
the maximum number of reassessment opportunities available to any student. If
you are failed in a module due to Academic Misconduct, you will normally have
the right to a standard reassessment, as detailed in the Academic Regulations,
unless the Panel deems the offence to be so serious that reassessment is not
offered.
11. However, if academic misconduct occurs in your final attempt at assessment, you
will not be permitted a further reassessment, unless you have had a PC
approved.
12. The outcome of your academic misconduct case will be reported to the relevant
Assessment Board who will make a decision on your reassessment status for this
module.
13. In all cases where reassessment is recommended, the submission date for
reassessment should always align with the standard arrangements for
reassessment in that cohort. If you are found guilty of academic misconduct you
will not be allowed to resubmit before those students undertaking standard
reassessment in that cohort.
14. You are required to engage in the conditions of any sanction applied. If you
refuse or fail to resubmit the element(s) of work as requested, a mark of zero will
be awarded for the whole module.
1. 16

15. Where a Major or Grave offence is proven, this will be recorded on your final
transcript.

10. How we will Communicate with you during the Academic
Misconduct Process.
1. We will use a variety of methods to communicate with you, including telephone,
email, text, face to face and online meetings.
2. Our main way of communicating information will be via email (which may include
letter attachments). Where we email you, we will use your University email
address. If access to this address has been removed during this or another
process, we will use the alternative email address you provided at
enrolment/registration.
3. It is your responsibility to make sure we have the right contact details for you and
to check your emails regularly. We will save all correspondence relating to your
Academic Misconduct case.

11.

Timeframes

1. These regulations specify timeframes for us and you to provide or respond to
information.
2. Sometimes circumstances beyond our control may impact on the timeframe or
alter the process somehow. Where this happens, we will communicate with you
regularly to keep you updated and ensure you are able to access any support you
require. We will also communicate such changes to the other parties involved.

12.

Appeals

1. You have the right to appeal the outcome of an Academic Misconduct Panel,
however your appeal must meet one or more of the University’s grounds for
appeal. These are:
•
•
•

Procedural irregularity in the process
Bias or perception of bias
Personal circumstances, the details of which were, for good reason, not
available to the Academic Misconduct Panel.

2. Disagreement with the Panel’s decision is not, of itself, a ground for appeal.
3. To submit an appeal, you must complete an Academic Misconduct appeal form
specifying relevant grounds for appeal and submit it by the deadline given in the
decision letter.
1. 17

13.

Office of the Independent Adjudicator (OIA)

4. If you remain dissatisfied with the outcome of your appeal, you have the right to
refer the matter to the OIA. The OIA will only consider appeals relating to
Academic Misconduct based on the grounds listed above. Matters concerning
academic or professional judgement are not normally accepted by the OIA.

1. 18

Key to Relevant Documents
•
•
•
•
•

Appendix 16 - Support to Study
Appendix 17 - Fitness to Practise
Appendix 22 - Academic Appeals
Appendix 23 - Role of Student’s Friend
Appendix 24 - Revocation of Awards Student Charter

1. 19

Annex A – The principles of oral investigation (viva)
A viva is a method of investigating whether Academic Misconduct may have taken place
and provides evidence for further investigations only. It is held at a local/departmental
level and is not the same as an Academic Misconduct Panel.
The meeting will be conducted under the normal fair and collegiate departmental
arrangements for such meetings.
Participants in the viva will normally be
•
•
•
•

The student (you)
The student’s friend (please refer to Role of a Student’s Friend)
The Chair of the meeting, who will be independent of the investigation
An academic subject expert – usually the person making the allegation

Where appropriate and practical, the external examiner for the area may also be
consulted.
We will give you information about the purpose and format of the oral examination in
advance of the meeting. You will also be given time to prepare for the meeting.
Please note the preparation time allowed will depend on the programme elements under
investigation and the nature of the alleged offence.
No sanction may be applied directly as a result of a viva.
Should the concerns of Academic Misconduct be unresolved by the viva, the normal
procedure for classifying the offence (Annex B) will be followed.

1. 20

Annex B – Classifications and sanctions
Notes:
All outcomes that do not lead to a student’s withdrawal from the University must include a prescribed educational element around
academic integrity. This will normally mean a student is required to attend a UniSkills workshop and/or complete the academic integrity
toolkit. Outcome notifications will specify the requirements.
If you refuse or fail to resubmit the element(s) of work as requested, a mark of zero will be awarded for the whole module.
Classification: Poor academic practice
No offence committed

Outcome

Authority for use

Includes
• poor or careless writing/referencing skills
• incomplete or unattributed citations
• lack of knowledge of academic writing
• lack of understanding of academic protocols
• misunderstanding of the expected academic
conventions of the department
• May include
• plagiarism, where this is identified as resulting
from a lack of understanding
• unattributed use of AI

You are allowed to repair the work for the full mark, on
the basis of the feedback received and in a timeframe
agreed with your tutor

Department and/or
faculty level

This classification is normally only applicable to
• students at Level 4 or below
• those studying modules on a standalone basis
• CPD/Masters/PGCE students who are returning
to HE after a break of five or more years

Classification: First or subsequent: Minor
Offence

Sanction

Authority for use

This includes:
• repeated poor academic practice
• unattributed graphic images
• several sentences of direct copying without
acknowledgement of the source

(S1) The offending sections of the work are set aside and Department, faculty or
a mark ascribed to the remainder
Academic Misconduct
Panel

Classification: First or subsequent: Major
Offence

Sanctions available

Authority for use

This includes
• copying multiple paragraphs in full without
acknowledgement of the source
• copying some of the work of a fellow student with
or without their knowledge or consent

(S2) You are deemed to have failed in the specific
element of assessment in which the academic
misconduct occurred. Upon resubmission you will be
capped at the pass mark for the whole module

Department, faculty or
Academic Misconduct
Panel

Classification: First or subsequent: Grave
Offence

Sanctions available

This includes:
• taking an essay or multiple essays from the
Internet without revealing the source
• copying much of the work of a fellow student with
or without their knowledge or consent
• any form of cheating in a formal examination
• suspected contract cheating

(S3) You will be deemed to have failed in all assessments Academic Misconduct
for the module/unit of a course.
Panel only
Upon resubmission, you will be capped at the pass mark
across the whole module
(S4) You will be deemed to have failed in all assessments
for the module/unit of a course. You are required to
resubmit and pass all elements of assessment. Upon
completion, a mark of zero is allocated and will be
recorded on their academic transcript
(S5) Withdrawal from the programme
(S6) Withdrawal from the programme and deem a student
to have failed all assessment taken in all modules during
the assessment period in which academic misconduct
occurred
(S7) Invoke procedure for the revocation of an award

Authority for use

Annex C – Overview of Academic Misconduct Procedure

Annex D – Agenda for Academic Misconduct Panel
1. The Chair will call for the student and tutor presenting the case to enter the room
and will:
•
•

Welcome the student and tutor to the meeting and introduce each member
of the Panel.
Outline the Panel’s remit and the procedure which will be followed.

2. The party which has requested the Panel shall present their case first.
3. The Chair will invite the tutor/student to present the case and then invite
questions from anyone in attendance.
4. The Chair will invite the student/tutor to respond, and then invite questions from
anyone in attendance.
5. When the Chair is satisfied that all relevant information has been provided, they
will explain the next steps to the student. That is, the Panel will deliberate and the
student will be notified of the outcome in writing within five working days of the
Panel taking place.
6. The Chair will then invite the student and presenting officer to leave the meeting.
7. The Panel will recount the evidence heard and discuss whether Academic
Misconduct occurred, and if so, to what extent.
8. Where Academic Misconduct has occurred, the Panel will discuss and decide the
sanction to impose, in line with the information detailed in Annexe B.
9. The meeting will close.

3. 25

Endmatter
Title
Policy Owner
Policy Manager
Approved by
Date of Approval
Date for Review

Appendix 8: Academic Misconduct Procedures
Director of Governance and Assurance
Head of Student Casework
Regulations Review Sub-Committee
July 2024
July 2027

11. 23
12.
