Skip to Main Content

Generative artificial intelligence: Use at University: About Generative AI

-

About Generative AI

-

Ethical considerations

-

Prompts

-

Teachers

-

Evaluating GenAI output

-

Acknowledgements & transcripts

-

Publishing

-

Copyright

-

Guide references

AI tools at Uni

Green icon from "Stellated Tricontahedron: Neural Networking" by The Playful Geometer is licensed under CC BY 2.0

What is artificial intelligence?

Artificial intelligence

Artificial intelligence tools are “computing systems that can engage in human-like processes such as learning, adapting, synthesizing, self-correction and use of data for complex processing tasks” (Popenici & Kerr, 2017, p. 2).

Algorithm

Generative artificial algorithms use sequential instructions via computer code and training data to perform a task such as predicting an outcome or making a decision independently from human assistance in sequential steps (Bergmann, n.d.-a).

Machine learning

In the context of artificial intelligence machine learning uses algorithms to learn how to identify patterns in its training data. It can then make decisions and predict new knowledge independently (Bergmann, n.d.-c).

Deep learning

Deep learning is the basis of most artificial intelligence available today (Bergmann, n.d.-b; NSW Government, 2026) and is a subcategory of machine learning. It learns on large sets of data via layered neural networks that mimic the working of the human brain enabling predictions to be made (Bergmann, n.d.-b; Lee, n.d.).

Large language models

Large language models are a type of deep learning model and train on vast amounts of data. Like deep learning models, they use layered neural networks called transformers that recognise patterns in word sequences. Thus, large language models can create new content based on their ability to predict the next word that matches patterns learned in their training (Stryker, n.d.; Stryker & Bergmann, n.d.). Large language models generate text using natural human-like language (Coursea, 2025b; Stryker & Scapicchio, n.d.).

Generative Artificial Intelligence

Stryker and Scapicchio (n.d.) state that generative AI uses deep learning models including large language and other foundational models to generate new content, for example, “text, images, video, audio or software code in response to a user’s prompt or request” (para. 1).

Federation University guidelines

Federation University guidelines

Teachers

- Artificial intelligence guidelines

- Gathering evidence for suspected, unsanctioned use of artificial intelligence tools

-

Using artificial intelligence (learning & teaching)

Students

- Using artificial intelligence responsibly

HDRs

-

A Guide for HDR Candidates on the use of Generative AI Tools (and discuss with your supervisor)

Microsoft CoPilot

- What you need to know to get started

DeepSeek

DeepSeek is an open artificial intelligence tool (like ChatGPT). Federation University has restricted the use of DeepSeek AI within the Federation University Australia network due to data security concerns.

Why have we restricted the use of DeepSeek?

DeepSeek is a new artificial intelligence tool (like ChatGPT). Like all AI models, it can collect, store and reuse any data you provide. However, there are major security risks associated with the technology that you should be aware of.

Lack of data encryption

- Messages sent and received through DeepSeek are not protected from third party collection.

Device monitoring

- DeepSeek collects extensive information from devices it's used on, including audio files, chat and search history, keystroke patterns, IP addresses and activity from other applications.

Foreign ownership

- Data received by DeepSeek is owned and stored outside Australia and can therefore be used for any purpose (which violates Federation University privacy agreements).

Different legislation

- DeepSeek is not subject to Australian legislation or governance.

What should I use instead?

We recommend Microsoft's Copilot because it has better built-in data security, and Microsoft is an approved University provider. However, we still urge you to be highly cautious when using any AI tools, particularly around sharing personal or sensitive data.

ITS knowledge article:

- What you need to know to get started.

Check the settings closely when using any AI software

Always check the settings on AI software before you start using it. For instance:

- We strongly encourage you to turn off the storage of your data

- Switch off any settings for training the broader AI model

- Turn off access to your chat history or the data stored in your device, and

- if the AI software requires significant access to your computer, device or data, do not use it.

Resources

Videos

Books

- The AI glossary: Demystifying 101 essential artificial intelligence terms for everyone

Websites

- What is artificial intelligence (AI)? IBM

- Understanding the different types of artificial intelligence (IBM)

- A common understanding: Simplified AI definitions from leading standards (Digital NSW)

- Generative AI primer for higher education - Joint Information Systems Committee (JISC)

-

-
Next: Ethical considerations >>

-
Last Updated: Jun 24, 2026 9:56 AM

-
URL: https://libguides.federation.edu.au/AI

-
Print Page

Login to LibApps

Report a problem

Subjects:

- How do I..?

ABN 51 818 692 256 | CRICOS provider number 00103D | RTO code 4909 | TEQSA PRV12151 Australian University

Federation University Australia acknowledges the Traditional Custodians of the lands and waters where our campuses, centres and field stations are located and we pay our respects to Elders past and present, and extend our respect to all Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander and First Nations Peoples
