Academic Misconduct Policy and Procedure
Policy / Principles
1. This Policy and Procedure applies to all students and former students at Imperial
College registered for Imperial College awards. Allegations of academic misconduct
involving members of staff of Imperial College will be referred to the Director of
Human Resources and dealt with by investigation and disciplinary measures through
the Human Resources Disciplinary Procedures.
2. Students and former students must note that conduct of a nature which would be
inappropriate in a member of some professions could require additional action. In
particular, students whose programme of study leads to provisional registration as
doctors, and whose conduct leads to consideration under the Academic Misconduct
Procedures may also be considered under the College’s Procedure for the
Assessment of Fitness to Practice Medicine.
3. If an allegation is made under these Procedures, the student shall be presumed to be
innocent until the contrary is established. The standard of proof that will be used will
be the civil standard i.e., on the balance of probabilities.
4. Throughout this Policy and Procedure, the Academic Registrar and the Head of
Central Secretariat may delegate any of the duties ascribed to them to another
appropriate member of College staff. Where staff changes occur, the roles ascribed
to individuals in these procedures may be re-assigned.
5. Any dispute as to the interpretation of this Policy and Procedure shall be referred
to the Academic Registrar, whose decision in the matter shall be final.
6. Academic misconduct includes Plagiarism (including self-plagiarism), Collusion,
Examination Offences and Dishonest practice. These offences shall be dealt with
according to procedures dependant on their relative severity as outlined in the
relevant sections of this document.
7. An allegation of academic misconduct may be investigated at any point, whether or
not a final mark has been agreed for the work in question, or if an award of the
College has been made.
8. The College considers that a judgement regarding whether an allegation of
academic misconduct is proven or not as a matter of academic judgement.
9. Where it is appropriate to do so, an allegation against a student that would more
appropriately be considered under the Student Discipline Procedure will be referred
to the relevant officer under that procedure.
10. Under the terms of this procedure, an investigation is defined as a fact-finding
process to establish the relevant evidence and circumstances of the case. The
investigation must focus only on the nature of the allegation and should be
approached in a non-judgemental manner. The process may involve reviewing
supporting records or documentation as well as interviewing the student(s) under
investigation.

Version: March 2023

Page 1 of 17

Imperial College London

Academic Misconduct
Policy and Procedure

11. The judgement in any case shall give details of the relevant factors considered,
stating the degree to which they contributed to the decision and will state the Panel’s
intentions in terms of the impact of the penalty on progression or degree awarded. It
will also refer to any other factors considered (e.g. Mitigating Circumstances), so that
precedence and best practice may be established. The written record will also be
important if a student submits an appeal against the outcome.
Definitions
12. Academic misconduct is any activity, intentional or otherwise, that is likely to
undermine the academic integrity of scholarship and research and where a student
gains or seeks to gain advantage by unfair or improper means. It includes plagiarism,
fabrication or falsification of results, collusion, examinations offences or anything else
that could result in undeserved credit for those committing it. Academic misconduct
can result from a deliberate act, for example use of unauthorised material in an
examination, or may be committed unintentionally.
13. Potential academic misconduct in postgraduate research programmes will be dealt
with under ordinance D17, The Investigation of Allegations of Research Misconduct.
14. The following list is not exhaustive; any attempt by one or more students to gain an
unfair advantage may be construed as academic misconduct and dealt with under
these procedures, irrespective of whether any benefit was gained by the student(s)
concerned.
i. Plagiarism –the presentation of work for any type of assessment which
contains, intentionally or unwittingly, the unacknowledged published or
unpublished words, thoughts, judgements, ideas, structures or images of
some other person or persons work, including work generated by artificial
intelligence and/or machine learning, for example by failing to follow
convention in acknowledging sources, use of quotation marks etc. This
includes material downloaded from electronic sources, the unauthorised use
of one student’s work by another student and the commissioning, purchase,
and submission of a piece of work, in whole or in part, as the student’s own
or the submission of work which has been generated by an artificial
intelligence or machine learning programme, including translation apps. A
student may also be considered to have committed plagiarism in an exam
or timed remote assessment if they utilise material without proper citation.
ii. Self-plagiarism – the presentation of work for any type of assessment that
the student has previously submitted for assessment as part of the same
module or programme, as part of another programme at the College, or at
another institution. This relates to the principle that a student may not
receive credit for the same piece of work more than once unless specifically
required to resubmit work as a requirement for reassessment, or as part of
a larger piece of assessment.
iii. Collusion – where a student presents for any type of assessment work
undertaken in collaboration with another as entirely their work or where a
student collaborates with another student on work which is submitted as
that other student’s work.

Version: March 2023

Page 2 of 17

Imperial College London

Academic Misconduct
Policy and Procedure

iv. Examination Offences include but are not restricted to:
a. taking unauthorised material(s) into the examination room.
b. making use of unauthorised material in the examination room.
c. communicating, or attempting to communicate, in any way with
anyone other than the invigilators during the examination or causing
any disruption which might impact other students in the examination.
d. failure to comply with an invigilator’s instructions.
e. being party to any arrangement whereby a person other than the
student fraudulently represents or intends to represent, the student
at an examination.
f. removal of any examination script, any part of an examination script,
blank examination stationery or rough notes or work from the
examination room except by a person with designated authority to
do so.
g. any attempt to tamper with examination scripts after they have been
handed in by students.
h. possession in the examination room of any device, such as a mobile
phone, smart watch, or other method of communication or
information storage that is not completely switched off and/or
deposited as directed by the invigilator.
i. any other conduct which is likely to give the student an unfair
advantage.
j. utilising prohibited material in a timed remote assessment (closed or
open book)
v.

Version: March 2023

For the purpose of this policy, dishonest practice is where a student is
alleged to have committed or contributed to dishonest acts to gain an
advantage. Examples of Dishonest Practice include but are not limited
to:
a. offering a bribe or inducement to a member of staff (academic or
professional support staff) so as to gain advantage in the
assessment process.
b. seeking to obtain access to confidential information, for example,
examination papers, prior to the examination.
c. contract cheating, including the purchase of essays or other material
from other sources.
d. the submission of work for assessment which has been generated
through an artificial intelligence of translation programme without
acknowledgement or authorisation.
e. making false declarations to the Mitigating Circumstances procedure
or providing fraudulent supporting evidence.
f. forging or falsifying signatures or official records in any way.
g. falsifying transcripts, certificates or other official College
documentation relating assessment outcomes.
h. providing work for another student to enable them to commit
academic misconduct
i. seeking to have/receiving support in an examination or timed
assessment against the instructions in place

Page 3 of 17

Imperial College London

Academic Misconduct
Policy and Procedure

Assessing the severity of academic misconduct
15. Each case is different, and judgement will need to be exercised in assessing the
seriousness of an allegation or incident of academic misconduct. The Academic
Registrar will confirm which procedure should be used where there is any doubt.
Boards of Examiners and Panels convened under this procedure must attempt to
ensure consistency of treatment between cases and make a judgement about what is
a proportionate penalty and ensuring that the penalty applied does not have
consequences for academic progression which are disproportionate in impact for the
individual student.
16. Factors to consider when determining the penalty and its proportionality include the
following:
• The student’s level of study; the more advanced and experienced the student,
the more serious the offence.
• The weighting of the piece of assessment and the credit rating of the module
to which it contributes, the higher the rating the more serious the offence.
• The student’s previous history: a subsequent offence, occurring after a
student has already received a warning or a penalty for academic misconduct,
is more serious than a first offence.
• The degree of intention to deceive in the piece of assessment in question
(which might be assessed by, for example, efforts to change wording, poor
referencing, or lack of referencing of plagiarised material, evidence from
earlier drafts, or evidence of premediated action such hidden notes or
commissioning) and evidence from any statement, written or oral, from the
student.
17. Allegations of academic misconduct must be reported as soon as possible and
normally within 20 working days of detection to ensure that the student’s case is
heard in a timely fashion and that any penalty applied is proportionate to the
student’s academic standing at the time of the offence.
Use of viva voce examination/investigator meetings in the Academic Misconduct
process
18. In most instances, the consideration of allegations under this procedure will be
considered under the paper-based processes described in procedures 1 and 2
below.
19. Under certain circumstances it may be necessary to hold a viva voce (oral
examination) of a person under suspicion of misconduct. Examples of when it may be
considered that a viva voce is appropriate would be where there is an allegation that
the student had the work completed by another person on their behalf (e.g.,
impersonation or contract cheating), or have utilised the work of another, including
other students, with or without their knowledge or consent, and without appropriate
citation.
20. The purpose of a viva voce is to provide the student with the opportunity to
demonstrate their authorship of the assessment, through their knowledge and
understanding of the subject and explanation of how the assessment was completed.
21. The meeting will be held between a suitable academic examiner(s) and the student.
The academic judgment of the examiner(s) will form the basis for the decision as to
Version: March 2023

Page 4 of 17

Imperial College London

Academic Misconduct
Policy and Procedure

whether the allegation is proven. The notes of the viva voce and decision of the
examiner(s) will form part of the case file.
22. It is most likely that a viva voce would be held during the investigation stage however,
an academic misconduct panel on receipt of the papers and following discussion with
the investigator may request this to be completed prior to deciding on the allegation.
PROCEDURE 1: Summary Process
23. In a taught programme of study, where the academic misconduct is an instance
of suspected minor plagiarism (including self-plagiarism) or collusion, or an
exam offence that is considered technical or is a minor offence, it shall be dealt
with in accordance with procedure 1 as outlined below.
24. Where plagiarism of any type is detected in group work, all members of that
group may be deemed to have collective responsibility for the integrity for work
submitted by that group and may be liable for any penalty imposed,
proportionate to their contribution.
25. Any allegation must be accompanied by a report from the member of academic
staff who is reporting the offence with a clear indication of where the work
submitted by the student(s) has evidence of plagiarism, or why they suspect that
collusion or an exam offence has taken place. Where the evidence is provided
from a plagiarism detection or originality checking service, such as Turnitin™, a
commentary must be provided as part of the report to indicate the location and
the level of the alleged plagiarism. They should also clearly indicate any areas
that should not be considered, for example template wording, or terms of
specific meaning/definition for which a match would be expected.
26. Any allegation of academic misconduct will be referred to the student for a
response prior to any decision being made.
27. Under procedure 1, the following instances will be referred directly to the Chair of
the relevant Board of Examiners (or other delegated person/panel acting on their
behalf) by the Department:
a) Where the allegation concerns a first offence of collusion or plagiarism for a
student and for which there is evidence that demonstrated that part of the
work has been plagiarised, either intentionally or unintentionally, and is not
judged by the Board of Examiners to form a significant part of that work
considered both by volume and by weight of meaning. This may include
allegations of self-plagiarism or suspected collusion (where the work of
another student is used with that student’s consent).
b) Examination offences that if proven would be a breach of these procedures
that are technical/could not result in unfair advantage (at first offence) for
example:
(i) Mobile phone still being on but not on the student’s person
(ii) Unauthorised material in the exam room unrelated to the exam in
question
(iii) Communicating with others in the exam room before or after the
exam, which does not cause disruption to other students is the same
venue
(iv) Other offences commensurate to the above.
Version: March 2023

Page 5 of 17

Imperial College London

Academic Misconduct
Policy and Procedure

28. The action open to the Chair (or nominee) on behalf of the Board of Examiners is as
follows: a . That there is no case to answer and therefore that no further action be taken
b. That the student concerned be informally reprimanded (i.e., that a note
should be kept on the student’s departmental file).
c. That the student concerned be reprimanded and required to resubmit the work
with correction to referencing/citation (not permitted to change substance of the
work).
d. That the student concerned be reprimanded and that the piece(s) of
assessment should be marked on merit.
e. That the student concerned be reprimanded and that the piece(s) of
assessment should be marked on merit, but the mark given for the
performance of the student in the piece(s) of assessment in question be capped
at the pass mark
f.

That the student concerned be reprimanded and that a mark of zero be made
upon the performance of the student in the assessment in question, with any
further permitted resubmission be capped at the pass mark.

Note 1: the decision of a Board of Examiners that plagiarism has occurred need not
preclude the student in question from submitting subsequent assessment for the
same programme, where applicable.
29. Any such action taken by, or on behalf of, the Board of Examiners should be
reported to the next meeting of the Board at which students’ results are confirmed,
and a summary report of action taken by the Board during the academic year
under this procedure, in which individual students are not named, should be made
annually, normally via the minutes of the meeting of the Board, to the Academic
Registrar as part of the annual monitoring process.
30. Consideration of a minor offence by the Chair (or nominee) would normally be
completed within 20 working days of the allegation being raised.
31. In the notification to the student of the decision that they have committed academic
misconduct, it must include the reason for the decision, the agreed penalty (and why
this penalty has been agreed), and that they have the right to appeal (see section
below).
32. Recording of summary offences: All proven offences will be recorded on the
student’s official record. In cases considered by, or on behalf of, the Board of
Examiners, a summary of the offence and the penalty applied will be included in the
minutes. In order that the College has an overview of the extent of any proven
offences, a report outlining the number of offences dealt with by each Department
drawn from the Board of Examiners minutes (in which individuals are not named),
combined with the record of offences considered under procedure 2 shall be
prepared in Registry and considered by Senate with any recommendations for
action.
Version: March 2023

Page 6 of 17

Imperial College London

Academic Misconduct
Policy and Procedure

Procedure 2: College Level Process (Academic Misconduct Panel)
33. All other instances not covered above will be considered by the Academic
Misconduct panel. Each Department should delegate to one or more academic
staff the responsibility for the investigation of suspected instances of academic
misconduct on behalf of the Academic Registrar. As soon as is reasonably
possible, and normally within 20 working days, the investigator will ensure that the
allegation form is completed (Appendix II).
34. The Student Allegation form, along with a copy of, or link to, this policy, the evidence
related to the offence and any relevant documentation such as the assessment brief
or examination instructions shall then be sent to the student to request a written
response to the allegation. The student shall complete and return the relevant
sections to the investigating officer within 10 working days from the date on the
letter. This will include the option to provide any supporting documentation in
addition to the written response statement in the form. If there is no response from
the student, the College shall by default proceed to the establishment of an
Academic Misconduct Panel (see para 40 onwards). The investigator is encouraged
to send a reminder within the 10-day response period if no response has been
received. It will not be considered a procedural irregularity if a reminder is not sent.
35. Where it is suspected that a student has made use of another student's work
without that student's consent, this will normally be regarded as a major level
offence of plagiarism.
36. Where an offence of plagiarism is suspected in more than one piece of
assessment or where an offence of plagiarism is suspected in respect of an
individual who has previously been received a penalty for an academic misconduct
offence including an offence of plagiarism, the offence[s] shall be considered
under procedure 2 even if the offence[s] taken in isolation might normally be
regarded as minor in nature.
37. Where the Department’s investigating officer deems on the evidence presented that
the allegation is one that could be considered under the summary process (in that
it could be minor or technical in nature), they, after consultation with the Chair of the
Board of Examiners, may decide that the matter can be dealt with by the Board of
Examiners, or that no further action will be taken. The matter shall, thereafter, be
regarded as closed.
38. Where the investigating officer considers that there remains a case to be considered
by an Academic Misconduct Panel, all case papers including the communications to
date with the student will be provided to Student.disciplinary@imperial.ac.uk for the
Casework Team to take the case forward.
39. In a situation in which the offence does not directly link to an assessment that the
student is currently studying, for example they are alleged to have provided their
work to another student in a following year to facilitate academic misconduct, the
Academic Registrar will decide if it should be considered under this policy or under
the Student Discipline Procedure.

Version: March 2023

Page 7 of 17

Imperial College London

Academic Misconduct
Policy and Procedure

ESTABLISHMENT OF AN ACADEMIC MISCONDUCT PANEL
40. On receipt of an allegation of misconduct to be dealt with by a panel, a member of
the casework team will review the documentation to ensure that:
a. A fully completed allegation form is received
b. That the student has been granted the opportunity to respond
c. That the evidence referred to has been provided and meets the minimum
expectations under this procedure.
41. Where any of the above are not in place, action will be taken to rectify either by
referring the case back to the department or completing any outstanding actions as
appropriate.
42. An Academic Misconduct Panel of three members will be convened on behalf of the
Academic Registrar. Where a student has admitted the allegation, a Panel of one
experienced member will be convened. The Panel is required to consider the
allegation, the relevant evidence, and any response received from the student prior
to coming to a decision, and if necessary, to give a penalty in line with the tariff at
Appendix I.
43. The members of the Academic Misconduct Panel will be drawn from an approved list
of Academic staff members updated annually. The Panel will be supported by a
member of the Casework team acting as secretary and is expected to agree a
spokesperson for the proceeding between themselves but noting that if there are
later queries or appeals any member of the panel may be called on.
44. The decision of the Academic Misconduct Panel may be that:
a. The allegation is not proven on the balance of probabilities and that it should
be dismissed.
b. The allegation is proven on the balance of probabilities and that a penalty
should be applied in line with these procedures.
(Where the Academic Misconduct Panel findings are ‘a’ or that an offence has been
proven that they consider should have been considered under the summary process
they will provide guidance through the Student Casework team why they have taken
this action to the reporting department).
45. If during their deliberation, if the panel agree that they require further information, for
example extra detail from the department or the student, this will be shared with all
parties at the outcome of the case.
46. The secretary shall communicate the decision of the Academic Misconduct Panel,
including where the decision is that no offence has been committed, in writing to the
student normally within five College working days following the decision of the Panel,
as well as their Head(s) of Department and any other persons involved in the case.
47. If the Panel are unable to come to a unanimous decision, normally the majority
decision will hold. This will be presented as the view of the whole Panel in any
correspondence. In exceptional circumstances, a new Panel will be requested to
review the allegation.

Version: March 2023

Page 8 of 17

Imperial College London

Academic Misconduct
Policy and Procedure

48. If the student wishes to appeal against the decision of the Academic Misconduct
Panel, they must submit the appeal form (Appendix III) to
student.appeals@imperial.ac.uk within ten College working days of receiving the
decision of the Academic Misconduct Panel. They must give the grounds of appeal
and include all relevant evidence. An appeal against the Academic Misconduct
Panel’s decision shall be allowed on the grounds listed in paragraph 50 and, if the
appeal is allowed, an Appeals Panel will be convened to consider the appeal
(see Establishment of an Appeals Panel section below).
49. Recording of offences: All proven offences will be recorded on the student’s
official record. Registry will maintain a record of allegations and outcomes, and
combined with the record of minor offences, a report shall be prepared in Registry
and considered by Senate with any recommendations for action of the cases
considered in the year.
NOTICE OF INTENTION TO APPEAL
50. Following the outcome of the consideration of an allegation of academic misconduct,
a student may lodge an appeal on one or more of the following grounds:
a. Where the student believes that there has been a material procedural
irregularity in the conduct of the academic misconduct procedure.
b. Where there is new evidence of extenuating circumstances which was
not available to the Board of Examiners or the Academic Misconduct Panel
and could not have been reasonably provided at the time of its decision.
c. Where there is evidence that the Academic Misconduct Panel or Board of
Examiners acted unfairly or where it was thought to have imposed an
outcome out of line with the procedure.
51. Notice of intention to appeal must be received in writing by the Student
Casework Team in Registry (student.appeals@imperial.ac.uk) on the form at
Appendix III, no later than ten College working days after the date on which the
student was formally notified of the decision. The notification of intention to appeal
must state the grounds for appeal and provide any relevant evidence.
52. The appeal will be reviewed by a member of Registry with no previous involvement
in the case. If an appeal is considered eligible, an Appeals Panel will be convened.
53. Where an appeal is not considered eligible, the student will be given one
opportunity to amend their submission. If the appeal is still considered to be
ineligible, the student will be informed that their appeal has not been accepted and
a Completion of Procedures letter will be issued.
ESTABLISHMENT OF AN APPEALS PANEL
54. The Appeals Panel shall be constituted from the College approved student casework
members list and include the President of the Imperial College Union, or a member
of the Imperial College Union council, nominated by the President.

Version: March 2023

Page 9 of 17

Imperial College London

Academic Misconduct
Policy and Procedure

55. The Panel will consist of:
a. College Consul or member of the College approved student casework
members list as Chair
b. 2 members of the College approved student casework members list
c. President of the Imperial College Union, or a member of the Imperial College
Union council, nominated by the President
56. To ensure a fair hearing, Panel members should not have been connected to the
offence in any way, nor should they be from the same department, the student’s
personal tutor or hall warden, or have any other close involvement with the student.
57. A secretary to the Appeals Panel shall be appointed by the Head of Central
Secretariat. The proceedings before the Appeals Panel and its deliberations shall
be recorded by the secretary in order to provide the decision-making process to all
relevant parties.
58. The student will be invited to attend the Appeal Panel meeting and advised of the
support mechanisms available to them and that they can bring a ‘friend’ with them to
the meeting for moral support but that this may not be acting in a legal capacity. For
the purposes of this procedure, a ‘friend’ is defined as either, a registered student of
Imperial College London, an officer or advisor of the Imperial College Union, or a
current member of staff at the College. With agreement from the Chair, the ‘friend’
may speak on behalf of the student.
59. The student will normally be given 10 working days’ notice of any request to attend a
meeting with the Appeals Panel. If a student is unable to attend, either in person or
via video conference they will be provided with one further opportunity to meet the
Panel. If a date cannot be agreed with the student within a reasonable timeframe,
the Appeals Panel may proceed with their consideration of the appeal and the
evidence provided in order to make a judgement. This is to ensure that the appeal
can still be considered and concluded in a timely fashion. In such a case the student
will be invited to provide a further written statement.
60. No fewer than five working days before the date set for the hearing the secretary to
the panel will arrange for a copy of the appeal submission, and the papers on which
the decision of proven academic misconduct was reached to all members of the
panel, the student, and the decision-maker (or nominee). Such documents would
include any written statement(s) made by the student.
61. A cover letter that includes the role and remit of the Appeals Panel, the time and
place at which it will be held will be sent with these documents. The pack should
also include details of the Department’s measures to communicate the
seriousness of the offence and its definitions.
62. The Panel will consider the evidence provided with the application for appeal and
the documentation from the consideration of the academic misconduct offence. The
decision-maker (or their nominee) will also be invited to attend the panel, to answer
any questions from the Panel with regards to the consideration of the case.

Version: March 2023

Page 10 of 17

Imperial College London

Academic Misconduct
Policy and Procedure

APPEALS PANEL HEARING PROCEDURE
63. All sittings of the Appeals Panel shall be held in private.
64. Chair of the Panel will facilitate introductions and explain the role and remit of the
panel to those present. A summary of the procedure that will be followed in the
hearing will be given.
65. The student will be invited to summarise their appeal submission. The decisionmaker (or nominee) will then provide a statement with regards to the decisionmaking process.
66. The panel will then ask questions of the student or decision-maker to clarify any
points made in the submission or arising in the hearing. The student and decisionmaker may also ask questions.
67. Before the Panel considers its finding, the decision-maker (or nominee) and then the
student shall have the opportunity to make any closing statements.
68. Once these statements have been received, and if no further points of clarification
are required as the result, the Chair will close the open part of the hearing for the
Panel to deliberate in private. If possible, the Panel will reach its finding without
adjournment. The secretary shall be present to record the decision and to provide
procedural guidance.
69. The Appeals Panel may, at its discretion, at any time during the proceedings, order
the room to be vacated, or the members may themselves retire to another
room for private discussions. Only the panel members and the secretary shall be
present at these times.
DECISIONS OF THE APPEAL PANEL
70. The Appeals Panel shall determine in private whether the grounds for appeal are
upheld, partially upheld, or rejected. The reasoning for their collective decision on
the appeal shall be recorded by the secretary on the relevant section of Appendix III.
71. Where necessary the decision of the Appeals Panel shall be reached by a majority
vote but shall be announced as the decision of the Appeals Panel. In cases of a
split vote, the Chair shall have the casting vote. The votes of individual Panel
members shall always be treated as confidential.
72. The Panel shall normally reach its decision on the outcome without adjournment.
However, if an adjournment is required, the Panel may adjourn for a period not
exceeding five working days.
73. Where the Panel fully or partially uphold the appeal, they will make a
recommendation for action based on their findings. This may include quashing the
proven offence, amending the outcome (for example amending a major proven
offence to a minor proven offence), or requiring a new investigation where they are
unable to make a judgement on the offence themselves.
74. If the Appeals Panel finds that the penalty given to the student is not
commensurate with standard practice, without a reasonable rationale for this, it may
Version: March 2023

Page 11 of 17

Imperial College London

Academic Misconduct
Policy and Procedure

amend the penalty, in line with the tariff at Appendix 1. The Panel may not increase
the penalty previously given.
75. The outcome of the Panel’s deliberations shall be communicated to the student (and
the department) in writing as soon as possible after the Panel meeting, no more than
five College working days after the hearing, or seven College working days if an
adjournment has been required.
76. All paperwork relating to the Appeals Panel shall be entered on the student’s file in
the Registry and maintained in line with the College retention policy.
77. In keeping with the Human Rights Act (1998), should the student wish, the decision
of the Panel will be posted on the relevant departmental notice board(s).
COMPLETION OF PROCEDURES
78. The outcome of the appeal stage concludes the College’s internal procedures with
regards to the allegation of Academic misconduct, and therefore a Completion of
Procedures letter will be issued to the student.
79. This letter will explain that if the student is still dissatisfied, the student may direct
their complaint to the Office of the Independent Adjudicator for Higher Education
(OIA) within one calendar year of the date on which the Completion of Procedures
Letter was issued. Information on the complaints covered by the Office of the
Independent Adjudicator and the review procedures is available at:
http://www.oiahe.org.uk.

Approval details
First approved on:

20 June 2018

Approval by:

Senate

Sub-committee to monitor and review:

QAEC

Version no:

March 2023, version 1.3

Version effective from:

15 March 2023

Full review in:

Academic year 23/24

Contact:

Quality Assurance Team, Registry

Updates (type):

September 2019: Minor updates
October 2021:
• Updates to investigation process for allegation of misconduct
• Updates to penalty structure and guidance to panel members
March 2023:
• Updates to academic misconduct definition
• Updates to panel composition where a student admits to an
allegation

Version: March 2023

Page 12 of 17

APPENDIX ONE – PENALTIES FOR ACADEMIC MISCONDUCT
1. In considering cases of academic misconduct, the Academic Misconduct Panel (or
Appeal Panel) may impose the following penalties. Whilst the suggested tariff in the
table below would be expected to be followed, each body which imposes a penalty
can vary the penalty from the suggested tariff but must provide a clear written
rationale for making the variation.
2. The body imposing a penalty for proven academic misconduct that is not considered
to be poor academic practice should bear in mind that a student that has been
deemed to have committed an offence should receive a higher penalty than would
result from not submitting the piece of work in the first place.
3. The penalty given for a proven case of academic misconduct will be dependent on:
a. The level of study (the standards of practice are higher as academic level
increases).
b. Weighting of the assessment as part of the module or award (larger
assessments in the scheme of the award would incur a higher penalty).
c. The extent/ amount of the misconduct (severity of the offence in terms of
overall word count for example).
d. Evidence of a deliberate attempt to deceive (for example changing references
in an essay or hidden notes in an examination)
e. The number and type of any previous offences.
f. Any significant mitigating or aggravating factors with regards to the case.
4. Significant mitigating factors include but are not limited to:
a. Severe personal circumstances.
b. Physical or Mental Health difficulties that would have impaired function and/or
reasoning.
c. Pro-active action by the student to make the College aware of the offence.
Whilst significant mitigating factors may be considered, the body imposing a penalty
should bear in mind the provisos under paragraph 2 above.
5. Significant aggravating factors include but at not limited to:
a. Previous or similar offences, including through summary procedures.
b. Lack of engagement with the process.
c. Lack of understanding of the seriousness of the allegation.
d. Potential disruption/disturbance to other students.
e. Clear evidence of an attempt to deceive the marker/invigilator.
6. Where a student is proven to have committed simultaneous/ near simultaneous
offences, the decision-maker(s) will need to consider how this should be considered
when agreeing the penalty. For example: if the offence is plagiarism in two pieces of
assessment that have been taken before a student has been informed of the
concerns in the work and had an opportunity to change their understanding of
referencing and citation, the decision-makers may agree to consider them as the
same instance (e.g., both a first offence, rather than a first and subsequent offence).
For other offences, such as a multiple moderate or severe examination offences, the
decision-makers may decide that this is not appropriate due to the type of offence.

Version: March 2023

Page 13 of 17

Imperial College London

Academic Misconduct
Policy and Procedure

7. To aid decision-makers the follow are examples of each level of offence.
• Poor academic practice: Work in which there are small amounts of
incorrectly paraphrased or quoted material, which do not appear to be
dishonest or have a material impact on the assessment.
• Minor offence: For plagiarism this would include plagiarised material of no
more than 15% of the assessment work, that attempts have been made to
appropriately reference, or for an examination offence that there appeared to
be no deliberate dishonest action, for example a phone being left switched on,
but is not used/attempted to be used.
• Moderate offence: A moderate amount of the assessment is plagiarised
(between 15 and 50%) with little attempt to appropriately reference, or an
examination offence in which there is some disruption to other students
and/or may lead to an unfair advantage.
• Severe offence: Significant proportion (more than 50%) of the assessment is
plagiarised with little or no attempt at appropriate citation, or an examination
offence in which there is disruption to other students/gives an unfair
advantage (e.g., notes, hidden earpiece, disruptive behaviour).
8. The available penalties for Academic Misconduct are1:
Penalty

Notes

a. Informal reprimand but no further
action is required
(N.B. all other penalties from b-i
include a formal reprimand)

The piece of assessment will be marked and the mark
achieved will be reported to the Board of Examiners
as the final mark.

(N.B. all other penalties from b-i include a formal reprimand)
b. Re-submission required with
correction to referencing/citation (not
permitted to change substance of the
work).

The piece of assessment must be resubmitted by the
deadline given by the Board of Examiners (or
nominee) with corrections to referencing and citation
only. The content is not permitted to be changed in
another way. If it is found to have occurred, the Board
of Examiners should take action such as capping at
the pass mark.

c. Assessment is marked on its merits

The piece of work will be marked by removing any text
to be considered plagiarised. If this results in a fail
mark, this will stand and the student will be subject to
the normal Board of Examiner’s decisions in relation
to the failure.

Penalties a-c would not normally be utilised by an Academic Misconduct panel except where there
are extreme significant mitigating factors or where is it considered that the offence is due to poor
academic practice.
1 Panels should consider when agreeing a penalty the relative size of the assessment as part of the

module, and/or the size of the module. They may consider that for very large modules (greater than
15 ECTS) it is appropriate to apply a ‘lower’ penalty from the tariff due to increased impact on the
student because of its weighting as part of their programme of study.
Version: March 2023

Page 14 of 17

Imperial College London

Academic Misconduct
Policy and Procedure

d. Assessment is awarded zero, with resubmission required and capped at
the pass mark.

The submission is recorded as having a mark of zero.
The Board of Examiners will set the resubmission
requirements and the resubmission will be capped at
the pass mark.

e. Module is awarded zero, with resubmission as required by the Board
of Examiners, capped at the pass
mark.

The module is recorded as having a mark of zero. The
Board of Examiners will set the resubmission
requirements for the module and if this is passed, the
module mark will be capped at the pass mark.

f. Module is awarded zero, with
resubmission required. The mark for
resubmission of the module will be
zero, though credit will be awarded
should it be of a pass standard.

The module is recorded as having a mark of zero. The
Board of Examiners will set the resubmission
requirements for the module and if this is passed, the
module mark will be recorded as zero. The zero mark
will be used for calculation of the year (as appropriate)
and programme overall weighted average.

g. Zero is recorded for the performance
of the candidate in all assessments
they sat in the academic year the
offence occurred and where eligible,
that the candidate will not be
permitted to retake all the
assessments until the next academic
year. The retake marks will be
capped at the pass mark.

All assessments (and therefore all modules) in the
year of study are set to zero. The Board of Examiners
will (depending on any other considerations such as
maximum registration and maximum resits years)
require the student to repeat the year for capped
marks only.

h. Zero is recorded for the module, no
retake opportunities will be given,
and the module will have no credit
awarded. The student will not be
permitted re-entry to for the module
and they will not be given an award
of the institution (expulsion).

The module mark is set to zero. The Board of
Examiners will ratify all other marks. The Board of
Examiners will not permit resubmission. The student is
not permitted to be given an exit award.

i. Zero is recorded for candidate in all
assessments and modules. The
student will not be permitted re-entry
to any modules. No credits will be
recorded for the student and they will
not receive an award of the institution
(expulsion).

All assessments and module marks are set to zero.
The Board of Examiners will not permit resubmission.
The student is not permitted to be given an exit award.

Where an award has already been made:
j. Award zero for module/assessment
undertaken (where appropriate
withdraw credit), rescind the award of
a degree/diploma/certificate of the
College, but retain any other credits
awarded (where appropriate).

Version: March 2023

The module mark is set to zero. The Board of
Examiners will not permit resubmission. Any previous
award given to the student is rescinded. The student
is not permitted to be given an exit award.

Page 15 of 17

Imperial College London

k. Award zero for all assessment (and
credit where appropriate) and rescind
the award of a degree/ diploma/
certificate of the College.

Academic Misconduct
Policy and Procedure

All assessments and module marks are set to zero.
The Board of Examiners will not permit resubmission.
Any previous award given to the student is rescinded.
The student is not permitted to be given an exit award.

9. Where appropriate due to the type of offence, the relevant decision-maker in the
case may require the student to undertake further training in Academic Integrity such
as the ‘plagiarism awareness’ course.
Consideration by the Board of Examiners following penalty by the Academic
Misconduct Panel
10. The Board of Examiners will receive the decision of the Academic Misconduct Panel,
to be considered alongside the rest of the student’s academic profile.
11. Under certain limited circumstances the penalty applied by the panel may have
unintended consequences for the student. For example, if penalty f is applied to a
student with a low overall weighted average it may mean that they fail to make the
minimum required over weighted average for progression or award. In cases such
as this the Board of the Examiners has the discretion to amend the penalty. They
should consider what additional action may need to be taken to ensure that the
intention of the penalty is applied without failing the student. An unintended
consequence does not normally include a delay in programme completion or
requirement to repeat part of the programme.

Version: March 2023

Page 16 of 17

Table
The following table has been produced for guidance. Where there are significant aggravating or mitigating factors, the suggested penalty
should be changed to reflect this, and the decision-making process must be clearly articulated in the notification to the student and the formal
record of the case. The panel should review the listed penalties available and agree what is appropriate based on the individual
circumstances. Where first offence is listed, this should be the first offence by the student as part of the programme of study, rather than by
year of study.
UG Years 1 2 & 2 (FHEQ level 4 & 5)
Category of proven offence

First Offence

Subsequent Offence

UG all other years and PGT (FHEQ level 6 and 7)
First Offence

Subsequent Offence

Plagiarism/ self-plagiarism/ collusion due to
poor academic practice

A-B

C-D

Minor plagiarism/ self-plagiarism/ collusion/
exam offence

C-D

D-E

C-E

E-F

Moderate plagiarism/ self-plagiarism/
collusion/ exam offence

D-E

E-F

E-G

F-H

Severe plagiarism/ self-plagiarism/ collusion

E-F

F-G

F-H

H-K

Severe Examination Offence

N/A due to level/experience of the student

F-K

F-K

Dishonest practice

F-K

2 Refers to year of programme of study. N.B. Direct entry level 6 programmes such as iBSc would be considered ‘UG all other years and PGT’.

Version: March 2023

Page 17 of 17
