Academic Guidance 2

2025-2026

Editorial Help for Student Assessment

Academic Guidance 2:
Guidance on Editorial Help for Student
Assessment
2025-2026

This document is available in hard copy and on the University intranet and internet
sites. Please contact the Information Centres (in each campus library) or the
Kingston Students’ Union Advice Centre if you have any difficulty in obtaining a copy
that you can read or find any aspect of these regulations difficult to understand.

Academic Guidance 2

2025-2026

Editorial Help for Student Assessment

Introduction
This guidance is for use when a student is considering whether to employ a third
party such as a professional copy editing or proof-reading company or software tool
(including generative artificial intelligence (GAI)) when producing work in draft or
final version.
This guidance also applies when a student seeks editorial help from other, nonprofessional third parties, such as fellow-students, friends and/or family.
It is not concerned with the regular and iterative interaction between student and
tutor/supervisor(s) on draft versions of their work throughout the registration period.
The student’s university’s tutor/supervisor is not regarded as a “third party” for this
purpose.
This guidance should be used by students as a set of principles to support academic
integrity when considering engaging with a third party. Ultimately it is the student’s
responsibility to ensure that the threshold between minor advice /corrections does not
result in the core work including the writing, creativity, arguments, analysis and
reasoning no longer being their own. Students should refer to the University’s
Academic Integrity Regulations for further information and contact their personal
tutor and/or supervisor for advice if that are not clear about what might constitute a
breach of Academic Integrity in this context.
In all cases, the assessment brief will specify the acceptable use of GAI. The
information in the brief will take precedence over this guidance. Where GAI use is
permissible, this will apply at all stages of the production of the assessment.
Principles governing use of third party help
All of the core work including the writing, creativity, arguments, analysis and
reasoning must be the students own work, and a student must not employ a third
party to do this work, whether in draft or as a final version, on their behalf. (This
does not preclude the use of a human or AI ‘scribe’ where verbatim dictation might be
required for a student with a particular learning support need.). If the student
chooses to use a third party, it is their responsibility to give them a copy of this
statement or where a software tool(s) is used, to ensure usage falls within
requirements of this statement. When submitting work, the student must
acknowledge what form of contribution the third party has made, by stating for
example, ‘this thesis/essay/dissertation was copy edited for conventions of language,
spelling and grammar by ABC Editing Ltd’.
Where a Generative AI has been used as part of the editorial process, then this must
be acknowledged by the student. Please see the assessment brief and the Student
Guide to AI in Learning and Teaching for further information.

Academic Guidance 2

1.

2025-2026

Editorial Help for Student Assessment

A third party can be used to offer advice and make minor corrections
related to:
•
•
•
•

spelling, punctuation, grammar, and syntax;
formatting and sorting of existing footnotes and endnotes ;
improving the position of tables and illustrations;
ensuring consistency of page numbers, headers and footers.

2.

The third party shall record such edits/advice by means of tracked changes
on an electronic copy or handwritten annotations on a paper copy or other
similar devices. The student must take responsibility for accepting any
edits / choosing what advice to accept and must themselves make the
changes to the master copy of the work, keeping a record of this. For work
that has been edited by a proofing / GAI tool, then a record of the process
followed must be kept.

3.

A third party cannot be used*:
•

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

to add or provide new content except for minor edits referred to above.
Such edits should be for the purpose of editing grammar, spelling,
punctuation, and syntax only, and such edits would normally be
represented by a small number of words in an existing sentence or
paragraph and would not include whole new sentences.
to change the text of the work so as to clarify and/or develop the ideas
and arguments.
to reduce the length of the work so that it falls within the specified word
limit
to add / edit references
to correct information within the work
to change the ideas and arguments put forward within the work
to translate the work into English
to shorten long sentences and edit long paragraphs
to change tense

*Exceptions may apply to the use of Generative AI tools where specified in
the assessment brief, particularly if the ‘Explicit use of GAI’ has been
specified.
