§

Academic
Regulations
Academic
Honesty
Section 10

leedsbeckett.ac.uk

Section 10
Academic Honesty
Contents
10.1

Purpose .......................................................................................................................... 1

10.2

General Principles of Academic Honesty ....................................................................... 1

10.3

Code of Practice for Academic Honesty ........................................................................ 2

10.3.1

Definitions .............................................................................................................. 2

10.3.2

General Provisions ................................................................................................. 4

10.3.3

Suspected Cases ..................................................................................................... 5

Section 10: Academic Honesty

Section 10: Academic Honesty
10.1 Purpose
Academic honesty is a fundamental principle within the University and is strongly linked to
good academic practice. This section of the Academic Regulations defines the University’s
approach to maintaining the academic honesty of students’ work and safeguarding against
breaches of academic honesty. The University has processes to investigate alleged breaches
of academic honesty and, where a breach of academic honesty is admitted or found, applies
appropriate penalties as defined in this code.
The University seeks to educate its students about academic honesty prior to assessment to
both reduce breaches of academic honesty and to highlight the severity with which certain
offences will be dealt. Academic judgement regarding the nature and severity of the case will
be applied prior to investigation of a suspected breach of academic honesty.

10.2 General Principles of Academic Honesty
The University will promote academic honesty and will focus on educating students about
good academic practice from the start of their course. Students will be required to develop
good academic practice throughout the duration of their study at Leeds Beckett University.
The University will ensure that students are treated fairly when being assessed and that any
student suspected of a breach of academic honesty will be investigated and will have a fair
hearing. Normally, where a mark has been confirmed by either a Module Board or a joint
Module/ Award Board, it is beyond the scope of these regulations.
Opportunities for further education about academic honesty and good academic practice will
be provided to students who have admitted to breaching, or been found to have breached,
these regulations
Penalties applied to students are appropriate to:
a) The gravity of the case
b) The circumstances of the case
c) The level at which the offence took place
d) Whether the offence was a repeat offence
There are two categories of investigation (minor and major offence) which relate to the
nature and severity of the suspected offence.
1

Section 10: Academic Honesty

Clear definitions of offences covered by these regulations will be provided to students.
Students will be informed of the consequences of breaching the regulations in respect of
academic honesty. Professional Body accreditation may have an impact upon the nature of
the penalty or the consequences of breaching academic honesty. All students so affected will
be made aware of this.
All forms of assessment are subject to these regulations (see Section 3). A suspected breach
of academic honesty in relation to a taught award will be investigated through local processes.
A suspected breach of academic honesty in relation to a research award will be investigated
by the Research Degrees Sub-committee.
A suspected breach of academic honesty , whether intentional or unintentional, is a matter
of academic judgement and may be considered a breach of these regulations.
Any student suspected of a breach of academic honesty will be provided with information
about the alleged offence which explains why they are being investigated.
Any student with a suspected breach of academic honesty will have the right to submit
extenuating circumstances in explanation of their actions. Where extenuating circumstances
are accepted they will be taken into consideration in determining the penalty. Full details can
be found in the guidance that accompanies these regulations.
Once an investigation into a possible offence commences, the student may not invoke the
Student Complaints Procedure on any matter directly related to the proceedings.
In the event of a finding that no offence has occurred, the documentation associated with the
allegation will be shredded/deleted immediately.
Where an offence has been admitted or found, all documentation associated with the case
will be retained in accordance with the retention policy.

10.3 Code of Practice for Academic Honesty
10.3.1 Definitions
Poor Academic Practice
Poor academic practice occurs when the standard of referencing is not at the level required
by the nature of the assessment. Poor academic practice is normally dealt with via the
2

Section 10: Academic Honesty

marking process. Feedback, including opportunities for further education about academic
honesty and good academic practice, should be provided.
Plagiarism
Plagiarism is the substantial, unacknowledged, incorporation in a student’s work of material
derived from the work (published or unpublished) of another. “Work” includes, but is not
limited to, materials in all formats and sources including print, electronic, online, audio visual
etc.
Examples of plagiarism include:
a)

the inclusion in a student’s work of substantial extracts from another person’s work
without the use of quotation marks
the substantial summarising of another person’s work without acknowledgement
the substantial and unauthorised use of the ideas of another person without
acknowledgement

b)
c)

Self-Plagiarism
Self-plagiarism occurs when a student submits their own work which has already received
credit. This may be part of a piece of work or the entire piece of work.
Self-plagiarism does not apply in circumstances where students are required to complete
reassessment or repeat a module(s).
Collusion
Collusion occurs when a student collaborates with another student in the completion of work
which is then submitted as unaided work by either student.
Cheating
Cheating is unfair behaviour relating to an examination. It includes, but is not limited to
a) Actions within the examination room/online platform:




communicating with any other candidate during an examination
copying from any other candidate during an examination
communicating with any other person other than an authorised invigilator or
another member of staff during an examination
3

Section 10: Academic Honesty





possession of any written or printed materials in the examination room unless
expressly permitted by the examination regulations possession of any
electronically stored information in the examination room unless expressly
permitted by the examination regulations
possession of a mobile phone or other electronic device during an examination,
unless expressly permitted by the examination regulations

b) Actions outside of the examination room/online platform:



gaining access to any unauthorised material relating to the examination during or
before the examination
obtaining a copy of a written examination paper in advance of the time and date
for its authorised release.

Contract Cheating
Contract cheating occurs when a student instructs a third party to do some or all of a piece of
work (paid or unpaid).
Other Forms of Unfair Practice
Other forms of Unfair Practice include, but are not limited to:
a)
b)
c)
d)
e)
f)
g)
h)

offering a bribe or inducement to any member of staff of the University, or any
external invigilator or examiner, who is connected with the student’s assessments
falsifying data in any piece of work
the assumption by one person of the identity of another person with the intent to
deceive or gain unfair advantage
submitting copies of another person’s work stored on an electronic device
non-compliance with university research ethics procedures
failure to gain ethical approval for the submitted piece of work, as appropriate.
use of generative artificial intelligence tools to gain an unfair advantage
other forms of intent to gain unfair advantage.

10.3.2 General Provisions
Standard of Proof
The standard of proof required at any stage of investigation is that of “the balance of
probabilities”.
4

Section 10: Academic Honesty

Timescales for Investigations
The University intends to deal speedily with any suspected breach of academic honesty and
has developed a service standard for investigating suspected breaches. The full service
standard can be found in the guidance which accompanies these regulations. The University
undertakes to endeavour to meet the timescales of the service standard, but accepts no
liability for failure to do so.
In exceptional cases, or where it becomes apparent that investigation of an alleged breach of
academic honesty is likely to be complex and protracted; or where relevant evidence cannot
be speedily obtained and presented; variation of the expected timescales should be agreed
between the student and the University.
Academic Honesty Lead
In order to provide a consistent approach to the promotion of good academic practice and
investigation of cases, each Dean of School or equivalent will appoint one or more Academic
Honesty Leads at school or subject level as deemed appropriate.
The role of the Academic Honesty Lead is to:
a) provide advice and guidance to members of staff on academic honesty related issues
b) determine the level at which cases should be managed
c) manage the Minor Offence process
d) assist with the delivery of staff development on academic honesty related issues
Consideration of Individual Cases
Each case will be considered on its own merits, and on the basis of:
a)
b)
c)
d)

The gravity of the case
The circumstances of the case
The level at which the offence took place
Whether the offence was a repeat offence

10.3.3 Suspected Cases
Making an Allegation
A suspected breach of academic honesty may be identified by a member of staff of our
university or of a collaborative partner.
5

Section 10: Academic Honesty

Taught awards may be investigated following submission of assessment or examination.
Research awards may be investigated prior to or following submission for examination.
Determination of Process
Categorisation of the suspected breach of academic honesty and determination of how it
should be investigated is made by the appropriate Academic Honesty Lead and the member
of staff identifying the suspected case.
The possible processes for investigation are:
Minor Offence
Examples of minor offences include, but are not limited to:




Repeat instances of poor academic practice*
Cheating
Collusion

* This will not normally include students at Level 4 or the start of Level 7.
Major Offence
Examples of major offences include, but are not limited to:



Contract cheating
Falsification of data

Minor Offence
A minor offence meeting will be conducted by the Academic Honesty Lead.
A student will be given the following information in writing, at least 5 working days in advance
of a request to attend a minor offence meeting:
a) The reason for their attendance being required
b) A copy of any relevant report or other evidence
c) The right to seek advice from the Students’ Union
d) The right to accompaniment/representation
6

Section 10: Academic Honesty

A student will have the right to:
i.
ii.

be accompanied by a friend (provided that the friend is not a professionally contracted
advocate);
be accompanied or represented by a Students’ Union representative. (This right of
accompaniment and representation is a general right and is not the right to
accompaniment and/or representation by a specific individual.)

It is the student(s) responsibility to:
a) Co-operate with the regulations concerning the alleged offence
b) Attend the investigatory meeting/submit a written response to the allegation
c) Demonstrate that the work is their own or that the alleged offence has not occurred.
Guidance about the format of the meetings and membership requirements for both
processes are provided by the Academic Quality Enhancement Office.
The outcome of an admitted or found case can be found in the Schedule of Outcomes.
Major Offence
An Academic Misconduct Board will be established to investigate suspected major offence.
This will normally be convened at School level.
Right to Accompaniment or Representation
A student will be given the following information in writing, at least 10 working days in
advance of a meeting of the Board:
a) The reason for their attendance being required
b) A copy of any relevant report or other evidence
c) The right to seek advice from the Students’ Union
d) The right to accompaniment/representation
A student will have the right to:
a) be accompanied by a friend (provided that the friend is not a professionally contracted
advocate);

7

Section 10: Academic Honesty

b) be accompanied or represented by a Students’ Union representative. (This right of
accompaniment and representation is a general right and is not the right to
accompaniment and/or representation by a specific individual.)
Responsibilities of Student(s)
It is the student(s) responsibility to:
a) Attend the meeting and/or submit a written response to the allegation
b) Seek advice from the Students’ Union if required
Membership of School Academic Misconduct Board
The School Academic Misconduct Board consists of:



Chair (Dean of School or nominee)
Two Academic Honesty Leads (from different Schools or Subject Areas to that of the
student under consideration)

The following participants will also be in attendance:





Internal Examiner (the person identifying the alleged offence)
Student
Student’s friend or representative (if applicable)
Secretary (a member of support staff from within the School)

Guidance about the format of the meetings and membership requirements for all processes
is provided by the Academic Quality Enhancement Office.
The outcome of an admitted or found cases can be found in the Schedule of Outcomes for
taught awards.
Viva Voce
A viva voce examination should be held where a student has a suspected case of contract
cheating. The viva should not determine whether the allegation is substantiated, but should
gather evidence to be considered by the Academic Misconduct Board, by allowing the student
to defend their work.
Where a suspected case of contract cheating is identified, a viva voce examination should be
arranged at the earliest opportunity. The viva voce examination can be held as a distinct
8

Section 10: Academic Honesty

meeting prior to the Academic Misconduct Board or as an integral part of the Academic
Misconduct Board meeting.
Viva Participants
Where the viva voce examination is held as an integral part of the Academic Misconduct
Board meeting, the participants are as outlined for the School Academic Misconduct Board.
Where the viva voce examination is held as a distinct meeting, the viva participants are:







Chair: an appropriately experienced and trained senior academic member of staff
(who may be an Academic Honesty Lead) from outside of the School to that of the
student under consideration
Student
Student’s friend or representative (if applicable), but not a legal representative
Academic subject expert (normally the person identifying the alleged offence)
Secretary (a member of support staff from within the School)

Right to Accompaniment or Representation
A student will be given the following information in writing, at least 10 working days in
advance of a viva voce examination:
a) The reason for their attendance being required
b) A copy of any relevant report or other evidence
c) The right to seek advice from the Students’ Union
d) The right to accompaniment/representation
A student will have the right to:
a) be accompanied by a friend (provided that the friend is not a professionally contracted
advocate);
b) be accompanied or represented by a Students’ Union representative. This right of
accompaniment and representation is a general right and is not the right to
accompaniment and/or representation by a specific individual.
Responsibilities of Student(s)
It is the student(s) responsibility to:
a) Attend the viva voce examination
b) Seek advice from the Students’ Union if required
9

Section 10: Academic Honesty

Conduct of the Viva
The Chair must ensure that the viva is conducted in a collegiate manner and that the student
is treated fairly.
The student should be allowed to present evidence, such as date-stamped draft copies of
their work, to support their claim that they did complete the work themselves.
The subject expert will normally ask questions about the work to ascertain whether the
student understands what they submitted and have met the relevant learning outcomes.
A record of the viva is added to the set of evidence that constitutes the case against the
student.
Further guidance about the format of the Viva Voce Examination is provided by the Academic
Quality Enhancement Office.
Schedule of Outcomes for Taught Awards
The category of the breach and the gravity and circumstances of the case will inform the
penalty in accordance with the schedule of outcomes for taught awards. Where extenuating
circumstances have been accepted they will be taken into consideration in determining the
penalty. Full details can be found in the guidance that accompanies these regulations.
The following outcomes will be available following an admitted or found case:
Investigation Stage
Minor Offence
(Academic Honesty
Lead)

Major Offence

Available Penalties
A mark of zero will be attributed to the assessment and the case will
be referred to the Module Board. Any eligibility for reassessment
(for a capped mark of 40% for Levels 4-6 and 50% for Level 7) will be
confirmed by the relevant Module Board/Progression and Award
board and be available at the next scheduled reassessment period.
A letter of warning will be sent to the student and they will be
strongly recommended to engage with the opportunities for further
education about academic honesty and good academic practice.
1) A mark of zero will be attributed to the assessment and the case
will be referred to the Module Board.

10

Section 10: Academic Honesty

Investigation Stage Available Penalties
Any eligibility for reassessment (for a capped mark of 40% for Levels
4-6 and 50% for Level 7) will be confirmed by the relevant Module
Board/Progression and Award board and be available at the next
scheduled reassessment period.
A letter of warning will be sent to the student and they will be
strongly recommended to engage with the opportunities for further
education about academic honesty and good academic practice.
2) Module failed with no right of reassessment.
A letter of final warning will be sent to the student and they will be
strongly recommended to engage with the opportunities for further
education about academic honesty and good academic practice.
3) Level failed and requirement to withdraw from the
course/pathway of study.
The Progression and Award Board will advise the student of their
entitlement to a contained award or credit achieved, if applicable.
A letter of withdrawal will be sent to the student.
Non-Attendance of Student at any stage of these procedures
In the event of non-attendance (in person, by telephone or internet) without good cause, of
a student at any stage of these proceedings, the Academic Honesty Lead or Academic
Misconduct Board is authorised to proceed in their absence.
Right to Request an Appeal Hearing
All students have a right to request an appeal hearing in respect of the decision of a Module
Board, Progression and Award Board or Research Degrees Sub-committee in accordance with
Section 9 of the Academic Regulations.
Fail Withdraw
All students have the right to request an early appeal hearing to reconsider a decision of Fail
Withdraw at the time of formal publication of decisions by the Academic Misconduct Board
or Research Degrees Sub-committee, (see section 9 of the Academic Regulations).
11

Section 10: Academic Honesty

Schedule of Outcomes for Research Awards
The Research Degrees Sub-committee may determine to do one of the following depending
on the circumstances and gravity of each individual case in accordance with Section 11 of the
Academic Regulations.
Awards and Level
MRes – Level 7
MPhil – Level 7
PhD / Professional Doctorate / European PhD /
PhD by Existing Published Work – Level 8

Available Penalties
Resubmit Withdraw from the
course/pathway of study
Resubmit Withdraw from the
course/pathway of study
Resubmit Withdraw from the
course/pathway of study

Considerations upon awarding penalty – Research Awards
Students may submit extenuating circumstances pertaining to their suspected case for
consideration by the Research Degrees Sub-Committee.

12
