Academic Conduct
Procedure

Academic Conduct: Our Values
What is good
academic
conduct?

At University of Staffordshire you will complete assessments so
we can check your understanding of what you have learnt, and
your work needs to be of a high standard so that any awards that
we give out are of the high quality that we expect. If you
complete your assessments well, it helps us to make sure that
you are ready to enter the workplace or further study. For more
reasons on why we assess student’s work, please see the
assessment policy and procedures.
We will make sure that academic research and assessments are
carried out fairly. You are expected to study and complete
assessments honestly. This means that;
•
•
•

Your work is your own;
You have acknowledged every source of information you
have used;
Your research has been done ethically.

If you do this, you will have good academic conduct.

Why is it
important?

Any form of cheating poses a threat to academic standards and
the value of our awards. This is important for all of our students.
Good academic conduct is important for you. It is part of your
development and without it, you are cheating yourself out of your
own learning journey.

How will you
help me study
with good
academic
conduct?

In some cases academic conduct can lead to referral to other
processes such as the Student Disciplinary Procedure, where
appropriate.
We understand that you may be adjusting to a new way of
learning, particularly if you are coming from a different academic
culture.
We will support you to understand what good academic conduct
is from the outset of your course, imbedding it in your learning
and development. Study Skills Teams are also here to help if
you need refresher support.
We want you to do the best you can. We understand that you
may ask someone to proof-read your work and that’s ok. But
asking others to change your work runs the risk of becoming
academic misconduct.

What if I am
studying with
2

We are not here to catch you out, we want you to understand
what is expected of you so that you can learn with good
academic conduct and be successful.

a college or
other
educational
provider?

If you are studying a University of Staffordshire course at one of
our partners, this procedure will apply but will be implemented
using local arrangements.
However, if you wish to appeal against a decision on your
academic conduct, the appeal will be considered at University of
Staffordshire and may require your virtual attendance.

Poor Academic Conduct: An
Explanation
What is poor
academic
conduct?

How is poor
academic
practice
different?

Poor academic conduct is called academic misconduct. This is
described as:
Any action which could give you, or someone else, an unfair
advantage in an assessment, including examinations. It is also
any action which could undermine the fairness of assessment
and research at the University.
There are different types of academic misconduct. You can find
a list here.
Poor academic practice is not academic misconduct. Poor
academic practice happens when you have used too much of
other’s work in your assessment, even when you have
acknowledged, and we can’t tell how much you’ve learned for
yourself. Alternatively, it may be that you haven’t understood
how to reference your work properly, but there is no evidence
that you have tried to gain an unfair advantage in your
assessment.
If we feel that your work contains poor academic practice, we will
discuss this with you and advise you on how you can improve.

Investigations into your Academic
Conduct
What should
I expect and
what can
you expect
of me?

3

We understand that going through an academic conduct
investigation will be difficult for you. However, we will treat you in a
sensitive and non-judgmental way. We handle your case
confidentially and the only people who will know about your case will
be those involved in providing us with evidence or making a
decision. We will share with you all the information we are using to
reach a decision and give you every opportunity to tell us your side.

We know that this is a difficult time for you, but we expect you to be
honest and respect those dealing with your situation and we will treat
you in the same way.

Support and
If you have a disability you can request that a reasonable adjustment
reasonable
is made to prevent you from being disadvantaged. Please let us
adjustments know as soon as possible if this applies to you.
What if my
Tutor thinks
I have
committed
academic
misconduct
?

Informal
Stage

All meetings undertaken within this procedure can be held digitally
If your Tutor believes that you have committed academic
misconduct, they will gather all evidence and inform your Course
Leader. Your Course Leader will inform you. The evidence will
normally include the Turnitin Report, if this is relevant, and any
sources which your we believe you have copied from. If the
allegations relate to cheating in an exam, we will include the
examination certificate.
If your Course Leader and person identifying the misconduct judge
that the instance is likely to be a minor one, as set out in the List of
Sanctions, we will deal with your case informally. If it is considered
that your case is more serious, we will ask you to attend a formal
meeting.
Your Course Leader and person suspecting the misconduct will
invite you to a meeting to discuss the allegation. A letter will be sent
to you which will explain what type of academic misconduct is
suspected and why. We will share the evidence we have gathered
and the List of Sanctions which could apply.
When you are invited to a meeting, we will give you one week’s
notice (excluding bank holidays and University closures) and you
may bring with you a fellow student or representative of the
Students’ Union. At the meeting we will put the allegations to you
and ask you questions about your work. You will have the
opportunity to explain your side and provide us with any evidence
you would like us to consider.
If you admit the misconduct, you will be asked to sign the Academic
Conduct Report.
If you admit the misconduct or not, after the meeting the Course
Leader will make a recommendation of an appropriate sanction to
the Head of Department who will confirm whether the sanction is
appropriate. You will be sent a copy of the decision. Please see
Decisions on your Academic Conduct for information on how your
Course Leader will make this recommendation.
If, through the investigation or meeting, it is considered that the
circumstances may be more serious, your case will be referred to the
formal stage.

4

Attending a formal hearing
What can I
expect to
happen if
I’m invited
to attend a
formal
hearing?

If you’re invited to attend a formal or appeal hearing meeting as part
of this process, there are certain things that you can expect to
happen.

Formal
Stage

If your case is considered to be more serious it will be referred to an
Academic Conduct Panel.

An agenda for the meeting will be sent to you with your invitation to
attend.
We know this can be a difficult time, so we always give you time to
prepare, this is one week (excluding bank holidays). We recommend
you attend with a Students’ Union representative, and if you wish to
do so, you should contact the Students’ Union as soon as you can to
arrange representation. Alternatively, you can attend with a
supportive student friend. If you want to, you can write a statement
before attending.

The Panel will normally comprise;
•
•
•

A Head of Department or Associate Dean who has not been
involved in the case (Chair)
Two academic members of staff with no connection to the case
A nominee of the Students’ Union with no connection to your
case

For each case, a minimum of three Panel members must be present,
including the Chair and the Students’ Union nominee. Where a
conflict of interest arises in relation to a particular case, a Panel
member may withdraw for that case and re-join the meeting
thereafter, provided that the minimum composition requirements are
met.
Hearings will normally be convened on scheduled dates throughout
the academic year, with cases referred to the next available hearing.
The person who suspects the misconduct will be present to give
evidence.
If you do not wish to attend the meeting and admit to the misconduct,
you may do so. You can return the signed Academic Misconduct
form to us and the Academic Conduct Panel will then apply the most
appropriate sanction.
Please see the Attending a formal Hearing section above for more
information.
Someone will take notes at the meeting and you will be sent a copy
of the decision within one week (excluding bank holidays and
University closures).
5

Viva Voce

If at any point during these proceedings, we have concerns that the
work you have submitted is not your own, we may ask you to attend
a further meeting with your Module Leader or Project Supervisor to
answer more detailed questions. This is called a Viva Voce and this
is outside of your normal assessment, this means that it will not
contribute towards your mark, but it will help us to decide if your work
is your own. A recommendation from the Viva Voce meeting will
inform our decision on your academic conduct.

Decisions on your Academic
Conduct
How will you
decide if
academic
misconduct
has
happened?

We will decide if academic misconduct has or has not occurred.
We will consider all of the evidence to make a decision based on the
balance of probability. This means that we will decide whether the
allegation of misconduct is more likely to be true than not.

How will you Each of the points below may have an impact on the case outcomes
decide on a and will be used by the panel to assess severity of the case
sanction?
a) Whether you have committed academic misconduct before;

b) How far you are into your academic journey;
c) How has the academic misconduct in your work impacted on
the mark given;
d) Is the academic misconduct widespread across a range of
modules;
e) Did you admit the offence in the first instance;
f) Is there is evidence that you committed academic misconduct
on purpose;
g) Do you have personal circumstances which affected your
decision making at the time?

Please see a list of case studies to help you understand how we
view offences.
List of Sanctions
Instance
Minor instance.

Normally a first offence and
limited to a single module.

Range of sanctions which can be applied
Failure of the assessment. You will be
reassessed, should an opportunity exist.
Or
Failure of the module concerned with a right
to be reassessed should an opportunity exist.

Major instance

Failure of the module concerned with a right
to be reassessed should an opportunity exist.
Or

6

Normally a second offence or an
offence which is widespread
across multiple modules.
Serious instance.
Normally a second or third
offence or any instance of
contract cheating/impersonation.

Failure of the level. All of the marks will be
wiped clean and you will re-start the level at
the next opportunity.
Failure of the award and/or termination of
your studies at the University. Your ability to
reapply and enrol again at the university may
also be restricted, normally for two whole
academic years.
The Executive Dean of School will confirm
the Panel’s decision.

Where Academic Misconduct has been proven and we apply a
sanction, the University will be unable to offer you condonement of
the module or assessment. For more information on this, please see
the “What is module condonement?” section of the Academic
Regulations.
In addition to a sanction you will be required to complete an online
module about academic conduct and sign a commitment regarding
your future study.

What if I think the decision is
wrong?
Can I appeal?

If you disagree with the decision made on your Academic
Conduct case, you can submit an appeal, although the grounds
for doing so are limited. When you are informed of the decision
on your case, you will be given details of how to submit an
appeal if you wish to do so.
The appeal process is evidence based, and so any appeal must
include independent, relevant evidence to explain your
reasoning. The Student Guide to Providing Evidence gives more
guidance about the type of evidence that might be appropriate.
Appeals must be submitted within two weeks. Please note that
timelines exclude bank holidays and University closures. After
that, an appeal will only be accepted if you have demonstrated
that there was nothing that you could have done to submit it on
time.
You may appeal against an academic conduct decision for the
following reasons which you must make clear in your appeal:

7

•

That the procedure was not followed properly and this has
affected the outcome;

•

That the decision reached was unreasonable due to bias
or the harshness of the sanction.

•

That you have new evidence which you were unable to
provide earlier in the process for valid reasons;

We will check that your appeal is:
•
•
and
•

The Appeal

On time, within 2 weeks (excluding banks holidays) of the
decision.
Meets one of the reasons to appeal.
Is supported by evidence.

If your appeal does not meet all the above, we will not consider it
and we will write to you explaining the reason why.
If your appeal is eligible, it will be considered by an Academic
Conduct Appeal Panel. This will always be held at University of
Staffordshire and may require virtual attendance if you are a
distance learning student or studying with a partner of the
University. The Panel is made up of the following;
•
•
•

An Executive Dean or Director with no connection to your
case
A Course Director from another course
A nominee of the Students’ Union with no connection to
your case

The Chair of the Panel or person making the original decision
may attend to give evidence.
Please see the Attending a formal Hearing section above for
more information.

The Appeal
Decision

Someone will take notes at the meeting and you will be sent a
copy of the decision within one week (excluding bank holidays
and University closures).
The Appeal Panel will make one of the following decisions:
•
•
•

What if I still
think the
decision is
wrong?

To agree with the previous decision
To start a new investigation because our procedure was
not followed.
To change the decision of the Academic Conduct Panel
(but not to increase the penalty) because there is new
evidence to consider or the previous decision was
unreasonable or biased.

If you disagree with the appeal decision, you have the right to
make a complaint to the Office of the Independent Adjudicator
(OIA) within one year of the decision. You can find out more by
clicking here.

Other Stuff
8

How does
academic
conduct relate to
other
procedures?

If you are registered on a course with professional
requirements or Fitness to Practise requirements, and we
find that academic misconduct has happened, we may refer
your case to the member of the School Management Team
with responsibility for Fitness to Practise. They will decide if
we need to refer to the Fitness to Practise Procedure
The academic conduct process overrides the Exceptional
Circumstances Procedure. This means that using the
Exceptional Circumstances Procedure does not stop us
from investigating and penalising any academic misconduct
in your work.
If there is evidence that your conduct would also be a
breach of discipline, for example if you are found to have
intimidated someone, we will also refer your case for
consideration under the Student Conduct Procedure.

Types of Academic Misconduct
We expect you to demonstrate learning by completing your assessments yourself.
Any of the below definitions may also include the unauthorised use of Artificial
Intelligence (AI) or other mechanisms.
Plagiarism
This is presenting work which is not your own, without acknowledgement of the
source, as your own work.
Self-Plagiarism
Submitting the same piece of assessment for two different modules would be
self-plagiarism. If you re-use your own work, you must reference it the same
way you would reference something you have used from a textbook.
Collusion
This happens if you submit a piece of work done in collaboration with another
student as if the work was entirely your own.
False Declaration
This happens if you either:
•
•

Make up evidence in support of an Exceptional Circumstances claim; or
Make up evidence in support of an Appeal.

Fabrication or Falsification of Data
9

This happens if you make up (or manipulate) data or results and record or
report on them in a piece of assessment.
Bribery or Intimidation
This happens if you pay; offer some other inducement; or through intimidation
attempt to gain an unfair advantage in an assessment. This offence may also
be referred to the Student Disciplinary Procedure.
Contract Cheating
This happens if you arrange for an assessment to be completed by a third party
and pass the assessment off as your own. This might involve buying either the
whole or part of an assessment, for example from an auction site or essay mill.

Examination Misconduct
An examination includes class-tests, written, oral and practical examinations.
The following is a list of academic misconduct relating to examinations, it is not
an exhaustive list.
Unauthorised Materials
•

•

Getting, or seeing, a copy of an examination question paper before the
date and time of its authorised release (this covers both ‘seen’ and
‘unseen’ papers)
Having an unauthorised dictionary in an examination

Technology in an Examination
•

•
•

The possession of technological or electronic devices such as mobile
phones, smart watches and hidden earpieces/micro earbuds/mini
cameras
The use of unauthorised material stored in the memory of a preprogrammable calculator, organiser, watch, or mobile phone
Having a calculator other than a dedicated calculator with a calculation
function only

Copying
•
•

Copying from, or trying to copy from, another candidate
Having or using concealed notes

Communicating
10

Communicating with, or attempting to communicate with, any person other than
an invigilator during an examination
Impersonation
•
•
•

Getting, or trying to get, someone else to take your examination for you
Getting, or trying to get, someone to take an examination for another
student
Taking, or attempting to take, an examination for another student

In such cases, both the student and the impersonator have committed
academic misconduct. We may report this type of academic misconduct to the
Police: impersonation is a type of fraud.

11
