Code of Practice on Plagiarism and Academic Misconduct
for Higher Education

Approved by the Academic Regulations Committee
Reviewed February 2025

Page 1

1. Principles
1.1 An overriding principle will be fair, appropriate and considered handling of any
Plagiarism or Academic Misconduct case.
1.2 Plagiarism is the act of a student claiming as their own, intentionally or by
omission, work which was not done by that student. For the purpose of this
Code of Practice this includes auto-plagiarism, fabricating evidence, results or
data, copying work done by others, cheating in examinations and/or obtaining
assessments through a commercial transaction (‘contract cheating’) and
inappropriate use of AI.
1.3 Plagiarism may arise in a number of differing ways within an academic
context, including the copying of the work of another student, the
reproduction of course materials, notes or data (without due reference), the
cutting and pasting of material derived from the Internet/AI tools and the
direct transcription of the contents of a textbook or journal. It may include
adaptation of existing texts.
1.4 Plagiarism also includes a student deliberately claiming to have done work
submitted by the student for assessment which was never undertaken by that
student, including the buying of essays and fabrication of data. This
constitutes a deliberate attempt to deceive the marker.
1.5 In each School the Head of Department (or nominee) will be the first point of
contact for staff within the School where plagiarism is suspected or detected.
Where a case requires further intervention the Deputy Dean will be contacted.
Serious cases will require consultation with the Executive Dean.
2. Guidance and Prevention
2.1 UCB will ensure that students have access to the appropriate levels of support,
counselling and advice and that staff receive regular briefings and support.
2.2 UCB will publish written guidance to students as to what constitutes effective academic
writing and UCB’s referencing guidelines.
2.3 It is the responsibility of each individual student to ensure that referencing
conventions used in the University are understood and acted upon at all times.
2.4 Schools will support students to develop appropriate referencing skills throughout the
duration of their studies.
2.5 For hard copy submissions UCB will use assignment frontispieces within which students
certify that the submitted work is their own work. For online submissions the virtual
learning environment (Canvas) incorporates a declaration on all module sites regarding
student ownership of work being submitted in accordance with this Code of Practice.
Page 2

3. Detection of Plagiarism
3.1 UCB reserves the right to use all legitimate means at its disposal to detect plagiarism
where it arises. All submitted work will be liable to scrutiny in order to identify any
plagiarised element.
3.2 Plagiarism will consider the ‘balance of probability’ whether plagiarism has occurred
and its extent before forming a judgement and deciding an appropriate course of
action.
4. Process for dealing with suspected Plagiarism
4.1 Where a member of staff considers that a student's work contains unattributed or
questionable material following an initial investigation, that member of staff should notify
the Head of Department (or nominee) of their findings. Possible initial evidence/findings
could include, but are not limited to, another student’s assignment, other documents that
have been copied and/or notification of third-party involvement. In some cases, suspicions
may be explored via a meeting with a student (by the Module Leader or nominee) about
the assessment content, with the expectation that a student should be able to reasonably
answer questions about their own assessment. Such meetings should also be used for
assessments with high Turnitin Similarity/AI detection scores, as these scores are not
definitive evidence. AI detection reports should be shared with the student. Where further
intervention is required, the Head of Department will discuss the case with the Deputy
Dean.
4.2 The student will be invited in writing to meet with the Head of Department or Deputy
Dean, setting out the fact they are suspected of plagiarism. They may invite another
UCB student/Guild representative with them for support. The person invited for
support may not answer on behalf of the student. Any AI detection report will be
included in the invitation.
4.3 At the meeting, the Head of Department or Deputy Dean will go through the suspected
plagiarism concerns with the student. The student will be invited to respond, explaining
how they believe that the suspected plagiarism may have taken place and, if necessary,
to refute the allegation.
4.4 Where a student does not attend a meeting, the Head of Department/ Deputy Dean,
may use an appropriate means of communicating with the student in lieu of a meeting,
in order to obtain a detailed response concerning the allegation of plagiarism.
4.5 If a student does not respond to the request, the Head of Department/or Deputy Dean
will make a judgement as to whether they believe plagiarism has taken place on the
balance of probabilities. A written record of the decision should be made, setting out
the grounds on which this decision was taken.
4.6 Should the Head of Department or Deputy Dean be satisfied that plagiarism has taken
place, whether knowingly or unknowingly, they should then assign it a category. A
Page 3

number of factors will be taken into account in this categorisation, including;
a)
b)
c)
d)
e)

the academic level of the student;
the proportion of the assignment affected; and
any previous recorded instance of plagiarism by that student;
The wider circumstances around the submission;
Any relevant evidence presented

5. Categorising Plagiarism
5.1 The suspected plagiarism should be placed into one of the following categories based
on the exercise of academic judgement and experience. In selecting a category,
consideration should be made of whether there is a reasonable expectation that the
student should have learned the appropriate referencing skills and received sufficient
guidance with regard to the attribution of source material.
5.2 Poor Academic Practice
5.2.1 Poor academic practice would be considered as not following appropriate
academic conventions. This may particularly apply to students who may not
yet be familiar with the requirements of Higher Education level assessment.
5.2.2 This category would include any first offence amounting to inadequate
referencing.
5.2.3 This category will consider whether factors of wellbeing and state of mind
contributed to the identified poor practice.
5.3 Process for dealing with Poor Academic Practice
5.3.1 Where poor academic practice has been determined, the Head of Department (or
nominee) should ensure the student is aware of the nature and extent of the poor
academic practice and has been given appropriate support and guidance how to avoid this
in future. A record should be kept by the Head of Department (or nominee), but no
further measures shall be taken.
5.3.1 A copy of the notification of the outcome should be forwarded to the Examinations Unit to
ensure that the student’s records are amended accordingly, and a note will be added to the
Student’s Dashboard record.
5.3.2 Where a student’s state of mind was a contributing factor, the student will be directed
towards internal support.

5.4 Moderate Plagiarism
5.4.1 Moderate plagiarism is most likely to arise from a failure to follow guidelines on what
is regarded as a student’s own work, ignoring conventions and acceptable academic
practice.

Page 4

5.4.2 This category includes collusion, auto plagiarism (submission of an assignment
identical or closely related to one submitted at an earlier point and for which a mark
has been received) or a moderate inclusion of un-attributed or incorrectly attributed
copying. It also includes repeated poor academic practice.
5.5 Process for dealing with Moderate Plagiarism
5.5.1 Where moderate plagiarism has been determined, the Head of Department or Deputy
Dean should ensure that the student is aware of the nature and extent of moderate
plagiarism and has been given appropriate support and guidance how to avoid this in
future.
5.5.1 In such cases, the Head of Department or Deputy Dean should meet with the
student to seek clarification /explanation about the concerns raised.
5.5.2 A copy of the notification of the outcome should be forwarded to the Examinations
Unit to ensure that the student’s records are amended accordingly and that it is added
to the central record of academic misconduct.
5.5.3 Where the investigation finds that the student would benefit from additional support,
the student will be directed accordingly.

5.5.4 Where a case of moderate plagiarism has been determined. The mark obtained in the
assessment may be downwardly adjusted to an appropriate level (reflecting the actual
contribution of the student) and reported to the Examinations Officer.
5.6 Serious Plagiarism
5.6.1 Serious plagiarism arises from deliberate attempts to deceive.
5.6.2 This category includes using significant unattributed material, clear intention of deception
or repeated moderate plagiarism.
5.6.3 Serious plagiarism also includes any use of material obtained from a website or other
source that involves a commercial transaction and the production of academic work by a
third party for gain.
5.7Process for dealing with Serious Plagiarism
5.7.1 Where serious plagiarism is suspected the Deputy Dean will inform the Executive Dean
(or nominee) who will carry out an initial review of the information collated and will
determine whether further action is required.
5.7.2 Where a student does not wish, or is unable, to attend a Plagiarism Panel, the
Executive Dean (or nominee) may use an appropriate means of communicating with
the student in order to obtain a detailed response concerning the plagiarism
allegation.
5.7.3 The student should be informed of the next stage of the process. This should indicate
the potential consequences of plagiarism and invite the student to attend. The
student may be accompanied by a ‘friend’ if they wish (i.e. another member of UCB
Page 5

or a representative from the Guild of Students. The person invited for support may
not answer on behalf of the student.

5.7.4 Where a student does not wish, or is unable, to attend a Plagiarism Panel, the Executive
Dean (or nominee) may use an appropriate means of communicating with the student
in order to obtain a detailed response concerning the allegation of plagiarism.
5.7.5 If a student refuses or is unable to attend a Plagiarism Panel, the Panel will make a
judgement as to whether they believe plagiarism has taken place in the absence of the
student. A written record of the decision should be made, setting out the grounds on
which this decision was taken.
5.7.6 If the outcome of the Plagiarism Panel is that it does not conclude that the student has
committed plagiarism, no further action is taken. If the outcome of the Plagiarism Panel
is that it concludes that the student has committed serious plagiarism, a penalty shall
be imposed as under 5.7.8 below
5.7.7 The outcome will be communicated to the relevant academic departments and
the Examinations Unit who will record and take action as appropriate.
5.7.8 Where a student has committed serious plagiarism, penalties could include, but not
be limited to:
5.7.8.1
5.7.8.2
5.7.8.3

failure of a module
disciplinary suspension for a period of one or two semesters
recommendation for expulsion

If the outcome of the Plagiarism Panel is that it concludes that the student has
committed such serious plagiarism that expulsion should be considered, the matter
will be forwarded to the Senior Pro Vice-Chancellor Teaching, Learning and Digital
under the Code of Practice on Discipline
6

Cheating in an examination

6.1 Students must ensure that they do not engage in any form of cheating in connection with
the examination. UCB treats any form of cheating under examination conditions as an
extremely serious matter.
6.2 Cheating in an examination occurs when a student seeks to improve their performance in
an examination by accessing or attempting to access material not listed on the front of the
examination paper (the rubric).
6.3 Where a student is suspected of cheating or has been caught cheating in an examination,
the invigilator will confiscate any unauthorised materials and complete an Examination
Incident Report form.
Page 6

6.4 The student is permitted to finish the examination. The student must be invited in writing
to meet with the Head of Department (or nominee), setting out the fact they are
suspected of cheating in an examination.
6.5 The Examination Incident Report form together with any confiscated materials and the
student’s question and answer papers are brought to the attention of the Head of
Student Records and Academic Registry. Head of Student Records and Academic
Registry then notifies the appropriate, Head of Department.
6.6 The student must be invited in writing to meet with the Head of Department (or
nominee), setting out the fact they are suspected of cheating in an examination. At the
meeting, the Head of Department (or nominee) should go through the incident with the
student, establishing why this is regarded as a possible case of cheating in an
examination. The student should be invited to respond, explaining how they believe
that the suspected case of cheating in an examination may have taken place and, if
necessary, to refute the allegation. If the student wishes, they may bring a friend (a UCB
student) or representative of the Guild of Students to support them.
6.7 Where the investigation finds that the student would benefit from additional

support, the student will be directed accordingly.
6.8 Where cheating in an examination has been determined, the Head of Department
(or nominee) should determine an appropriate penalty as under 7.12 below.
6.9 The Head of Department (or nominee) should inform the student in writing of the
outcome and a record will be added to the Student’s Dashboard.
6.10 Where a case of cheating in an examination has been determined to have occurred,
one of the following penalties shall be applied (the penalty will be mindful of the
student’s personal circumstances at that time which may have contributed to the case):

a) The student will be deemed to have failed the examination.
b) A penalty commensurate with serious plagiarism if appropriate.
7 Right to Appeal
A student may appeal the penalty imposed for plagiarism on grounds of the appearance
of new evidence or procedural irregularity. Any such appeal must be submitted to the
Assessment Appeals Committee of the Academic Board using this form within five
working days of receipt of the notification of the outcome of the plagiarism decision.

Page 7
