Academic Integrity Policy and
Procedures
Education Services
September 2026

Academic Integrity Policy
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

Introduction
Why Academic Integrity Matters
Purpose and Scope
Responsibilities and expectations
Definitions
Breaches of the policy and outcomes from investigations
Further guidance and support
Ownership and oversight
Version history

Academic Integrity Procedures
1.
2.

Principles of investigation
Scope of investigation

Procedures for students on undergraduate and postgraduate taught
programmes
1.
Diagrammatic summary of investigational procedures
2.
Staff roles
3.
Initial review (Level 1)
4.
Meeting with an Academic Integrity Adviser (Level 2)
5.
Academic Integrity Panels (Levels 3 and 4)
6.
Appealing an outcome
7.
Breaches of academic integrity outcomes
8.
Guidance to inform application of outcomes
9.
Outcomes and professional suitability
10.
Group work and breaches of academic integrity
11.
Reporting outcomes to examining boards

page 3
page 3
page 3
page 4
page 5
page 5
page 6
page 6
page 6

page 7
page 7
page 7
page 8
page 8
page 9
page 9
page 10
page 10
page 11
page 12
page 13
page 13
page 13
page 14

Procedures and penalties for Postgraduate Research degrees
page 14
1.
Expectations
page 14
2.
Regulations
page 14
3.
Scope of the investigation procedures
page 15
4.
Diagrammatic summary of investigative procedures
page 16
5.
Breaches of academic integrity outcomes
page 17
6.
Roles and responsibilities
page 19
7.
Initial allegation – a breach is suspected
page 19
8.
Initial investigation (Level 1)
page 20
9.
Meeting between the candidate and the College Director of PGR (Level 2) page 21
10.
College PGR Panel provides further investigation and review (Level 3)
page 22
11.
The penalty to be imposed results in withdrawal of registration
page 23
12.
Additional procedures for the investigation of allegations arising during
page 23
the final assessment process for PGR awards
Procedures for Partnership students
1.
Procedures for Partnership students

page 24
page 24

2

1. Introduction
The University values a culture of honesty and mutual trust and expects all members of the
University to respect and uphold these core values. Every student of the University is
expected to act with integrity in relation to the production and representation of academic
work, and in acknowledging the contributions of others in their work. This is crucial to
maintaining the credibility and quality of academic standards and upholding the value of
degrees awarded. We describe this as “academic integrity.”
Academic Board provides senior management oversight of academic integrity matters at the
University, with a reporting line through to the Board of Governors.

2. Why Academic Integrity matters
Academic integrity matters because it is the foundation of trust, fairness and meaningful
learning. When students act with honesty, their work truly reflects their knowledge and
effort, allowing tutors to assess their understanding accurately. Integrity also ensures equal
opportunity, preventing dishonest behaviour from promoting unfair advantages.
Academic integrity is essential not just for academic success, but for developing critical
thinking and character. It builds habits that continue into professional and personal life,
such as honesty, accountability, responsibility, and respect for others’ work. Upholding
these values promotes credibility and ethical decision-making.

3. Purpose and scope
All staff and students are responsible for adhering to this policy.
This policy sets out the responsibilities, expectations and requirements of staff and students
in promoting and maintaining academic integrity. It provides definitions of the breaches of
academic integrity that will be investigated under the university’s academic integrity
procedures and outlines the frameworks that ensure academic standards are maintained.
Students’ commitment to ethical conduct is essential in maintaining the integrity of the
university’s academic standards. Students should have a baseline understanding of what
constitutes cheating in an academic context by the time they reach University-level study.
Students who fail to adhere to the expectations of this policy will be subject to investigation
under the university’s academic integrity procedures. The academic integrity procedures
contain the operational detail that supports the delivery of this policy. They explain the
process of investigation when a breach of academic integrity is alleged, and the outcomes
that may be applied.

3

4. Responsibilities and Expectations
The university will:
•

Promote good practice in assessment design as a proactive strategy to prevent
breaches of academic integrity by designing assessments that are clear, meaningful,
and aligned with learning objectives so that students are motivated to engage in
authentic, ethical learning experiences;

•

Be committed to ongoing staff development to effectively respond to technological
advancements that may have an impact on academic integrity;

•

Maintain a culture of integrity and accountability by providing robust support for
whistleblowers who report breaches of academic integrity;

•

Provide appropriate support to students, thereby helping them navigate challenges and
reduce the likelihood of breaching academic integrity;

•

Monitor breaches of academic integrity on an annual basis and use this data to inform
academic practice.

Staff will:
•

Communicate expectations clearly when explaining to students what constitutes a breach
of academic integrity;

•

Ensure that students are provided with appropriate information and learning
opportunities about good practice and scholarship, and how to avoid engaging in poor
practice up to and including breaches of academic integrity;

•

Ensure assessments are designed to promote academic integrity and authentic authorship;

•

Ensure allegations of academic integrity breaches are investigated robustly and fairly.

Students will:
•

Be aware of the ethical and academic standards expected of them;

•

Fully engage with the information and training opportunities provided by the University
aimed at developing their understanding of academic practice and skills;

•

Be responsible for their own work;

•

Create work that is honest, authentic and reflective of their own knowledge and
understanding;

•

Uphold the principles of this policy.

4

5. Definitions
Behaviour that constitutes a breach of academic integrity in the context of this policy and
the academic integrity procedures includes but is not limited to:
Plagiarism
Self-plagiarism
Collusion
Contract cheating
Fabrication
Falsification
Research ethics
breaches
Impersonation
Use of unauthorised
materials
Facilitation of
misconduct
Breach of assessment
instructions
Misrepresentation

Presenting another person’s work or ideas as your own without
proper acknowledgement.
Re-using your own work (wholly or in part) that has been
submitted for a different assessment for which credit has
been/is due to be awarded.
Unauthorised collaboration on work required to be completed
individually.
Obtaining assessment work created by a third party, whether
paid or unpaid.
Inventing data, evidence, sources, references, or results.
Deliberately altering data, evidence, or results.
Failure to follow required ethical standards, such as getting
ethics approval, obtaining informed consent, or protecting
confidential information.
Completing an assessment for another person or allowing this to
occur.
Using materials, resources, or devices not permitted under
assessment conditions.
Assisting or enabling another person to engage in misconduct
such as providing them with assessment material (paid or
unpaid)
Failure to comply with stated assessment requirements e.g.
breaching exam or coursework rules or conditions.
Providing false or misleading information about your work or
contribution.

6. Breaches of the policy and outcomes from investigations
The University is committed to upholding the standards of academic integrity and will
investigate any suspected breach of this policy. The investigation process is guided by the
Academic Integrity Procedures that explain the steps to be taken when a breach is
identified. The procedures ensure fairness and transparency in addressing allegations of
academic integrity breaches.
The following principles are followed to determine the outcomes from investigations
•

Education first: prioritising learning and prevention where appropriate

•

Proportionality: aligning outcomes to seriousness and impact

•

Equity: recognising differences in academic experience and level

•

Consistency: supporting staff to make defensible decisions

•

Futureproofing: avoiding over-reliance on specific technologies or detection tools
5

Investigations into breaches of academic integrity may result in a range of outcomes
proportionate to severity, from formative educational interventions through to formal
penalties including mark reductions or failure of the assessment or module. More serious or
repeated breaches can lead to students being withdrawn from programmes. In the most
severe cases, students may be expelled from the institution entirely. The outcomes applied
will be determined after a thorough and impartial assessment of the evidence, considering
the circumstances and severity of the breach. The University may use software and
detection tools to support academic judgement investigations of academic integrity.

7. Further guidance and support
The Academic Integrity web page provides guidance and a broad range of support resources for
students. Academic integrity - Assessments | UWE Bristol
Intranet guidance for staff is available concerning the application of academic integrity procedures
and key contacts.
Web-based training concerning ethical approval is provided for research supervisors via the
Learning and Development Unit.

Guidance on the use of Artificial Intelligence technologies
Guidance for students on the appropriate use of artificial intelligence technologies is available on
the university website. Using generative AI at UWE Bristol Students are responsible for ensuring
that any use of these tools complies with all relevant requirements.

8. Ownership and Oversight
Document name:

Academic Integrity Policy

Version number:
First approved by:
This version was approved by:

1.0
Learning, Teaching and Student Experience Committee
Learning, Teaching and Student Experience Committee

Effective from:
Next review date:
Senior Policy Owner:
Policy Author:
Overseeing committee:

September 2026
July 2029
Academic Registrar
Academic Enhancement and Student Partnership Team
Learning, Teaching and Student Experience Committee

9. Version History
Version
V1.0

Date
June
2026

Summary of changes
Policy replaces the Academic
Conduct Policy.

Author
Student Voice and Academic
Policy Team
6

Academic Integrity Procedures
1. Principles of Investigation
Where the University suspects that a breach of academic integrity has occurred, it will apply
the procedures explained in this document. The procedures apply to all students studying
towards degrees at or validated by UWE Bristol. In most cases, the procedures will also
apply to UK partner colleges and international partners, but individual partnership
agreements should be checked before progressing an investigation.
It is for the University to prove whether or not a breach of academic integrity has occurred,
and the standard of proof that is used in this policy is the ‘balance of probabilities.’ This
means that when considering all the evidence about a potential breach of academic
integrity, the University needs to be satisfied that it is more likely than not that a breach
has occurred.
The University applies a principle of ‘strict liability’ to breaches of academic integrity, this
means that the student’s intentions are not relevant to determining whether or not a breach
has occurred. In practice this means that the University does not consider whether the
breach was an accident or was deliberate in concluding whether or not a breach has
occurred, however, we do consider a student’s intentions when deciding on an appropriate
outcome once a breach has been proven.

2. Scope of investigation
• An investigation into a breach of academic integrity may commence at any point whilst the
student is still registered with the university, irrespective of whether a module outcome
has been confirmed by an examination board.
• Should concerns arise during an investigation about other modules’ assessments, this can
prompt further allegations and investigations.
• If an allegation of an academic integrity breach is made against an individual who is no
longer a UWE Bristol student, but the allegation relates to a time when they were a
UWE Bristol student, the university reserves the right to investigate. If upheld, this could
potentially result in an award being revoked.
• Where concurrent first breaches of academic integrity have occurred, these will be
investigated together. A concurrent breach is one where the student has not yet been
notified of the outcome of an ongoing first allegation. Any further breaches will be treated
as independent breaches.
• Cases will not be treated as concurrent where it is beyond reasonable doubt that there
was intent to cheat, deceive or gain an unfair advantage.

7

Procedures for students registered on undergraduate and
postgraduate taught programmes

1. Diagrammatic summary of investigational procedures

8

2 Staff roles
Academic Integrity Advisers will:
• Provide advice to staff members on whether a suspected breach of academic integrity
should be formally raised as an allegation.
• Provide guidance and advice to individual students who have been formally referred to the
academic integrity procedures for poor scholarship/where a breach of academic integrity
has been upheld; including advice on remedial action, support, and/or further training.
• Take an active role to identify and promote good practice and staff development in
relation to the detection and deterrence of academic integrity breaches.
• Promote good practice in assessment design as a key strategy for avoiding breaches
of academic integrity.
• Take an active role in monitoring and analysing case data and consider suitable
actions.
Executive Officers or their nominees will:
• Be responsible for implementation and compliance with the policy within their college.
• Facilitate the formation of and chair college academic integrity panels where required.
• Facilitates communication of the panel outcome to all relevant parties.
An Executive officer is nominated by the Head of College and should be a Dean of College or
School Director/Associate Head of School (or equivalent)

3. Initial review (Level 1)
• An individual who considers that a student has breached academic integrity should
report the allegation by providing supporting evidence to the Module Leader.
• If the Module Leader determines that there is no case to answer, the investigative process
will cease.
• In cases where the assessed work is found to display poor levels of scholarship, and it is
deemed appropriate to deal with this without formally recording an academic integrity
breach, the Module Leader will ensure the mark reflects the poor scholarship and that the
student is offered advice and support.
• If the Module Leader supports the allegation, they should refer the case to the relevant
Academic Integrity Adviser. If it is an Academic Integrity Adviser who is raising the
allegation, then an alternative Academic Integrity Adviser should fulfil the Academic
Integrity Adviser role.
• In cases where the evidence suggests a breach of academic integrity has occurred, the
student will be advised in writing of the nature of the concerns and the proposed

9

outcome/outcome. The student will be invited to meet with the Academic Integrity Adviser
and will have five working days to confirm whether they will be attending.
• If the student does not respond or declines the invite, the outcome for the academic
integrity breach as determined by the Academic Integrity Adviser and confirmed by
the Executive Officer will be applied. The student will normally be notified of the
outcome within five working days of the date of their response to the initial
communication.
• If the student confirms they wish to attend a meeting with the Academic Integrity
Adviser to discuss the allegation, the case proceeds to Level 2.

4. Meeting with an Academic Integrity Adviser (Level 2)
• The University will give reasonable notice of the meeting, normally a minimum of 5
working days. The student may be accompanied by a friend or adviser from the Students’
Union Advice Centre; however, they will not be able to speak on the student’s behalf.
• Meetings can be online or face-to-face and may be recorded.
• An Academic Integrity Adviser can request that a subject-matter expert attend the
meeting to explore the student’s level of knowledge and understanding of the assessment
topic.
• In the meeting, the Academic Integrity Adviser will review the evidence including any
explanation provided by the student and consider the nature and extent of the alleged
breach. They will consider the contribution of the work item or component to the whole
module and whether the student has previously been found to have breached academic
integrity.
• The student may be informed of the recommended outcome/outcome in the meeting.
• Within five working days of the meeting, the student will normally receive the final
decision of the Executive Officer in writing, unless further investigation is required.
• An Academic Misconduct Panel (see section 4.6) will be convened to confirm the outcome
if the outcome recommended by the Executive Officer is either Band E or F.
• If the Academic Integrity Adviser concludes that further review of the case is required, a
College Academic Integrity Panel will be convened and the case proceeds to Level 3.

5. Academic Integrity Panels (Levels 3 and 4)
College Academic Integrity Panel (CAIP) Terms of reference
• A College Academic Integrity Panel will be chaired by the Executive Officer or nominated
representative and a minimum of two members of academic staff from the college who
are unrelated to the investigation, ideally one of whom will be from the discipline area.
• A College Academic Integrity Panel will be convened by the Executive Officer or
nominated representative where the information and evidence concerning a case is
inconclusive and requires further exploration.
10

University Academic Integrity Panel (UAIP) Terms of Reference
• Any investigation into a breach of academic integrity which may result in a Band E or
Band F outcome will be referred to a University Academic Integrity Panel to confirm the
decision.
• University Academic Integrity Panels will be chaired by an Executive Officer or
nominated representative and a minimum of two members of academic staff, one of
whom must be from outside the college. All members of an Academic Misconduct
Panel must be unrelated to the investigation.
• Panel meetings can be online or face to face and may be recorded. The investigation will
review the evidence, establish whether a breach has occurred and, if so, its nature and
effect, and the appropriateness of any penalties to be imposed. During this investigation,
it may be necessary to consider other module assessments and further evidence may
arise.
• A student may be invited to panel meetings. The University will give reasonable notice of
the meeting, normally a minimum of 5 working days. In these cases, the student is
encouraged to be supported through the process by a friend or adviser from the Students’
Union Advice Centre. The Panel meeting may be rescheduled if the student is unable to
attend, but if the student declines a second invitation then it will proceed without their
attendance. A written statement by the student will still be taken into consideration if they
are unable to attend the panel meeting.
• In cases where two (or more) students may be involved e.g. collusion, the Academic
Integrity Panel may request a joint meeting and/or share the statements and evidence
with those involved.
• The Executive Officer will report the decision of the Academic Integrity Panel in writing to
the student, normally within five working days of the meeting.

6. Appealing an outcome
The only grounds for appealing the outcome of an investigation into a breach of academic
integrity are where:
• The student believes there has been a material and significant administrative error or
other material irregularity in the management of the case or
• There is new evidence, which for valid reason was not previously available and might
have materially affected the outcome and outcome applied.
Students must appeal the outcome of an investigation within ten working days by
contacting studentcasework@uwe.ac.uk

11

7. Outcomes
Summary of applicable outcomes for cases at undergraduate and postgraduate taught level.

Band

Nature of breach

Outcome Details

Further information

BAND A1

•

Minor concerns e.g. small-scale
mistakes that can be corrected through
feedback and do not materially affect
the integrity of the work.

BAND A2

•

Poor scholarship e.g. weaknesses in
referencing, paraphrasing, or source
use that are significant enough to
affect the quality or credibility of the
submission.

Not recorded as a formal
breach but concerns are noted
and will be taken into
consideration if a subsequent
breach happens.
Not recorded as a formal
breach but concerns are noted
and will be taken into
consideration if a subsequent
breach happens.

For first time breaches, a
student also receives a
written warning about
consequences of a further
breach, including
signposting to support
resources and/or advice as
appropriate.

BAND B

•

BAND C

•
•

There is an expectation for
the student to engage with
Assessment mark is adjusted to the support resources
provided.
reflect the concerns.
Mark of 0 for the work item

•

A significant breach of academic
integrity that invalidates a substantial
section of the assessment but does not
undermine confidence in the
assessment process.
Second breaches at Bands A1/A2
A serious breach of academic integrity
that undermines confidence in the
assessment process and presents a risk
to the integrity of the award.
Second breaches at Band B level

BAND D

•

Second breaches at Band C level

Mark of 0 for the work item,
and mark reduction applied
to the whole module (40%
levels 3-6, 50% level 7) if
a resit or retake is required.

In some instances, a Band E
outcome may be deemed
appropriate for second
breaches at the Band C level
(see Band E below).

BAND E

•

Multiple breaches (two or more) at
Bands C or D level depending on the
nature of the breach

Not permitted to continue on
the programme (required to
withdraw)

Referral to other university
procedures/policies
including fitness to
practice/professional
suitability/student conduct
Band E and F outcomes will
be approved by a University
Academic Integrity Panel.

Mark of 0 for the work item
with a mark reduction (40%
levels 36, 50% level 7) applied to the
work item if a resit or retake
is required.

Student is permitted to
complete modules they are
currently enrolled on,
excluding the one where the
breach has
occurred
BAND F

•
•

Three or more breaches at Band C or
above
Repeated deliberate and significant
undermining of assessment integrity

Immediate expulsion from
the university.

12

8. Guidance to inform an outcome
Issues which may be considered when deciding an appropriate outcome for breach of
academic integrity include:
• Whether the student accepts a breach, if a breach has been found, at the earliest
opportunity;
• Whether the student intended to deceive, and/or their honesty and integrity in dealing
with the investigation;
• Whether the student has breached academic integrity previously;
• Volume/proportion of the assessment affected;
• Size of assessment with respect to the overall module, and credit-weighting of the
module;
• Level of study, amount/nature of previous study;
• Impact of outcome on progression;
• Issues identified concerning the clarity of the assessment brief.
• Personal circumstances
Outcomes of academic integrity breaches for students on awards validated or accredited by
professional or statutory bodies may be constrained by the regulations of those bodies. This
may include reporting the breach to the professional or statutory body.

9. Professional suitability
• The outcome confirmed for a student registered on a professionally accredited
programme will be communicated to the Head of School who may report the outcome
to the regulatory body if required.
• If a Band E or F outcome is confirmed for a student registered on a professionally
accredited programme, the Head of School will report the outcome to the regulatory
body and also decide whether the student is permitted study on a professional
accredited programme at the university in the future. This decision will be recorded in
the university’s record system.

10. Group work
Any outcome applied in the event of an academic integrity breach will normally be
applied to all members of the group. The two exceptions are:
a. where a member of the group acknowledges, in writing to the Academic Integrity
Adviser, that they have breached academic integrity;

13

b. where the breach can be shown to have been committed by (a) specific member(s)
of the group responsible for those sections of the work that are the subject of the
breach.
In the case of these exceptions, the outcome will only be applied to the member(s) of
the group who has breached academic integrity.

11. Reporting outcomes to the Examining Boards
It is not within the remit of the Examining Board to determine whether a breach has
occurred or to decide on an appropriate outcome.
However, where an academic integrity breach is found to have occurred in relation to one or more
modules the Examining Board may take these into account when considering decisions on:
• compensation of failed credit;
• Whether any further action is required such as referral to other UWE Bristol policies
and/or external bodies e, g. professional, statutory or regulatory bodies.

Investigation procedures and penalties for
Postgraduate Research degrees
1.

Expectations

The University considers that all allegations of breaches of academic integrity relating to
research study undertaken by postgraduate researchers for the purpose of an MPhil or
Doctoral level award are serious and must be investigated accordingly. All students of the
University, including postgraduate researchers, are subject to the University’s published
policy about academic integrity and breaches of academic integrity.

2.

Regulations

E10. Research Governance, Conduct and breaches of academic Integrity
(i)

Candidates must comply with the University (and/or the approved equivalent
collaborative partner institutions) policies and Code of Good Research Conduct as set
out in Regulation A5.

(ii)

The Director of Studies and supervisory team will ensure that candidates have access
to information and training on the University’s expectations.

14

(iii)

Allegations of misconduct will be investigated in accordance with the procedures set
out in the University’s Code of Good Research Conduct and/or the University’s
Academic Integrity Policy.

3.

Scope of the investigation procedures

Allegations of academic integrity breaches made against postgraduate researchers (PGRs)
registered on an MPhil or doctoral level award (including those who are also members of
University Staff or affiliated Staff) will be investigated under the University’s Academic
Regulations and Procedures as follows.
1.

Allegations of academic integrity breaches made against PGRs relating to the
assessment of taught elements of the award for which UWE credit is awarded
(e.g., taught modules) will be investigated in accordance with part D10 of the
University Regulations and procedures relating to taught programmes within this
policy.

2.

Allegations of academic integrity breaches made against PGRs relating to the
assessment of the research project, the thesis or the critical commentary
(MPhil/DPhil by publication), or any other element of research undertaken
directly relating to the award, will be investigated under regulations at D10 and
E10and the procedures described below. The investigation will align with the
principles of the University Code of Good Research Conduct as appropriate.

3.

Allegations of research misconduct relating to any other area of research with
which the postgraduate researcher is connected will be investigated under
procedures set out in the University Code of Good Research Conduct. In addition,
the investigating College Director of PGR or PGR Academic Integrity Panel Chair
may also refer a breach of academic integrity for consideration under the
University’s Research Misconduct Procedures at any stage where there are clear
grounds to do so.

15

4.

Diagrammatic summary of investigative procedures

16

5. Breaches of academic integrity outcomes
Summary of applicable outcomes for proven breaches of academic integrity in MPhil
and doctoral level awards
The outcome tariff is designed with due regard to:
• the intent to deceive;
• the proportion of the material affected;
• the level of study;
• the extent of previous skills support training having been undertaken;
• any previous breaches having been recorded against the candidate by the University
at any level of study, but particularly at Masters level 7 and Doctoral level 8.
Outcomes

Nature of the breach

Normal outcome to be applied, or
range of penalties where there is
more than one available.

Poor scholarship

Incomplete, inaccurate or
missing citation in a small
number of instances.

• Details of areas for concern are
included in written feedback and
sent to both the candidate and the
Director of Studies (DoS), who must
meet to agree a plan of action to
improve the candidate’s
understanding of good academic
practice and any further training
needed.
• All examples must be rectified within
the work concerned.
• Poor scholarship within a thesis
submitted for final examination will
be raised as part of the viva process
and will require correction and / or
amendment as appropriate.
• No breach will be recorded on the
candidate’s student file/record.

First and
lesser
breach
(Not applicable for
breaches found in
a thesis submitted
for final
examination)

Evidence shows plagiarism
or other breach of a minor
nature in terms of volume
with very little significance
to the piece
of work overall.

• The investigating College PGR
Director (or other designated
person) issues a formal written
warning to the candidate copied to
the DoS, advising that further
breaches will be deemed ‘serious’
and may result in a severe outcome
being applied from the range
described.
17

•

The breach is recorded
candidate’s student file/record
until graduation.

• Candidate and DoS must meet to
agree an action plan as above which
will be subject to College/School
scrutiny as appropriate.
• All examples must be rectified
within the work concerned.
All other breaches
including:

Evidence shows plagiarism • Affected material is redacted
or other academic integrity
within the work to the
breach that:
investigating Director’s
First and serious breach;
satisfaction and the assessment
• Is not extensive
is permitted to go ahead.
Second / subsequent
and is of
breaches;
or
relatively minor
• The candidate is required to
significance to the
All breaches detected
resubmit the work or thesis for
within the thesis after
piece of work or
assessment in a manner and
its submission for final
thesis;
within a timescale decided by
examination, other than
or
instances of poor
the Investigating Director (or
• Is extensive
scholarship.
other designated
amounting to a
person)/College Academic
considerable portion
Integrity Panel no further
of the piece of work or
resubmission outcome
thesis, or there are
permitted;
numerous occurrences
or
throughout the work
• The candidate is required to
or
withdraw by the College
• is significant and
Academic Integrity Panel and
compromises the
their registration is terminated,
academic
no resubmission is permitted.
integrity of piece
The candidate will not qualify for
of work or thesis
the award on which they are
as a whole;
registered;
or
and/or
• The candidate
• The candidate is referred for
has committed a
investigation under the University
second/subseque
Research Misconduct Procedures.
nt breach, where
a proven previous
• In all cases the breach will be
breach has also
recorded on the candidate’s
been recorded
student file/record and included in
against them.
future academic references.
18

6. Roles and responsibilities
The Doctoral Academy will:
• Provide advice to staff members on whether a suspected breach of academic integrity
should be referred to the PGR breach of academic integrity process.
• Provide guidance and advice to individual PGR candidates who have been referred to the
breach of academic integrity process.
• Take an active role in monitoring and analysing data concerning breaches of academic
integrity and provide guidance on suitable investigative actions within the scope of
the policy.
• Provide support and regulatory guidance to the investigating College Director of
PGR (or other designated person) or College Panel throughout an investigation
into a breach of academic integrity.
The College Director of PGR (or equivalent designated person) will:
• Be responsible for implementation and compliance with the policy within the College in so
far as it applies to postgraduate research and PG researchers.
• Take an active role to identify and promote good practice in relation to the detection and
deterrence of academic integrity breaches within postgraduate research.
• Facilitate the formation of College PGR Academic Integrity panels where required and
support the College Dean of Research and Enterprise who will chair College PGR
Academic Integrity panels.
• Facilitate communication of the investigation outcome to all relevant parties in conjunction
with the Doctoral Academy.

7. Initial allegation – a breach is suspected.
• A person who considers that a postgraduate researcher (PGR) has committed a breach of
academic integrity within research work submitted for assessment or review must report
the allegation in writing as soon as possible to the Doctoral Academy. Preliminary
evidence to support the allegation should also be included. The Doctoral Academy will
liaise with the Director of PGR (or other designated person) for the College in which the
PGR candidate is registered.
• Where the allegation concerns work submitted for the Progression Examination the viva
may need to be postponed while the investigation is taking place. The Doctoral Academy
will inform the PGR candidate of this.
• Where the allegation concerns work that has already been submitted by the PGR for final
assessment (i.e.., the thesis or critical commentary) the Doctoral Academy will liaise with
the College Director of PGR (or other designated person) to determine whether it is
necessary to suspend the final assessment process or postpone the viva voce examination
while further investigation of the allegation is carried out.
19

8. Initial investigation (Level 1)
• The investigating College Director of PGR/other designated person and the Doctoral
Academy will consider the preliminary evidence and carry out additional investigation
to determine whether there is a case to answer, and if so the likely seriousness of the
breach.
• If there is the potential for a conflict of interests the allegation will be investigated by
another member of the College as appropriate or by the Director of PGR for another
College.
No case to answer
• If the investigating Director of PGR decides that there is no case to answer, the
investigation process will cease. No breach will be recorded on the PGR candidate’s
student record.
Poor Scholarship
• If the investigating Director of PGR decides at this preliminary stage that the issue is one
of a poor level of scholarship, they will inform the PGR candidate and their Director of
Studies (DoS) of this in writing. The work must be corrected as part of ongoing
supervision and the DoS will provide advice and guidance to the candidate on good
research practice and discuss what further training should be undertaken.
• Where poor scholarship is identified in work submitted for final assessment this will be
addressed as part of the viva process through required amendments.
• In either event no breach will be recorded on the PGR candidate’s student record.
The evidence suggests a breach has occurred.
• Where the evidence suggests that a breach has occurred it is for the investigating College
Director of PGR to determine both the volume and significance of the suspect work to the
research project as a whole, and the seriousness of any breach.
• In doing so they may consult colleagues with subject or technical expertise to assist in the
investigation. Individuals called upon in this way will be unconnected with the PGR
candidate or the research project concerned.
• In the case of work submitted for final assessment the investigating PGR Director may
also consult the appointed PGR examiners where this is appropriate (i.e., where the
examiners have had sight of the work).
• From this point onwards the PGR candidate’s Director of Studies (DoS) and supervision
team will play no part in the investigation, other than to provide information or evidence
as required by the investigating College Director of PGR.
• The nature and complexity of allegations about doctoral level work means that this
investigation stage may take some time. Where the investigation is likely to take more
than 10 working days from the date the allegation is received, the Doctoral Academy will
write to the candidate (cc the DoS) to explain this and provide an estimate of when the
investigation stage is likely to be concluded. Updates will be issued if the investigation
takes significantly longer than estimated.
20

• Once the Level 1 investigation stage is complete the investigating College Director of
PGR will write to the candidate to explain the allegation and the potential penalties that
may be imposed. The candidate will be invited to meet with the investigating Director of
PGR to discuss the allegation. The candidate will have five working days to respond to
this letter.
• The letter will be sent to the candidate’s UWE email address and by post to their
registered address.
• The letter will signpost the candidate to university sources of support and advice including
the Student Union Advice Centre and Wellbeing Service support.
• If the candidate declines the meeting or does not reply without good reason, the Director
of PGR will move to consider the outcome of the investigation and decide any outcome
as appropriate, forwarding the case for further review or confirmation if the seriousness
of the breach requires it. The candidate will have no further opportunity to meeting to
explain their actions or submit further evidence at this stage.
• If the candidate confirms they wish to attend the meeting the case proceeds to Level 2.

9. Meeting between the candidate and the investigating College Director of PGR (Level
2)
• The University will give reasonable notice of the meeting, normally a minimum of five
working days. The candidate may be accompanied by a friend or adviser from the
Student’s Union Advice Centre, but they will not be able to represent the candidate or
speak on their behalf.
• A face-to-face meeting is preferred, but the meeting can be conducted online where
necessary. The meeting may be recorded, or a contemporaneous note of the
meeting taken.
• A member of the Doctoral Academy staff will attend the meeting to advise on
regulatory matters and in absence of suitable recording equipment will take a written
note of the proceedings for subsequent circulation to attendees.
• The investigating Director of PGR may also invite another member of staff with
subject or technical expertise who may also put questions to the candidate about the
work under scrutiny.
• The candidate will have an opportunity to present any additional evidence or mitigating
explanation at this point. The Director of PGR will review the evidence, including any
mitigation, will consider the nature and extent of the breach, and the outcome as
appropriate.
• The candidate may be advised of the likely outcome and proposed outcome at the
meeting if it is appropriate to do so but will receive written confirmation of the outcome
from the investigating Director of PGR within ten working days.
• Where it is found that there is no case to answer the process will stop and no breach will
be recorded on the candidate’s student record. Assessment of the work may then resume
as normal.
• Where the breach is found to be first and lesser this outcome confirmation will comprise
a written warning to the candidate, copied to the Director of Studies.

21

• Where the breach is found to be first and serious, but the outcome proposed will not
affect the candidate’s ongoing registration on the award the outcome will be confirmed in
writing, and the Examining Board will be informed of the outcome.
• Where the breach is found to be first and serious or higher and the proposed outcome
has potential consequences for the candidate’s ongoing registration on the award, or
where the investigating Director of PGR concludes that further investigation is required,
the case will be referred to the College PGR Academic Integrity Panel and proceed to
Level 3.

10. College PGR Academic Integrity Panel provides further investigation and
review (Level 3).
College PGR Academic Integrity Panel terms of reference
• A College PGR Academic Integrity Panel will be chaired by the College Dean for Research
and Enterprise (or nominated representative) and comprise a further two members of
academic staff, one of whom will be the College Director of PGR who conducted the initial
investigation, and the other a representative from outside the College who is an
experienced research supervisor having successfully supervised at least four candidates to
completion, and has completed the UWE supervisory training. In addition, a subject or
technical expert nominated by the Chair may be added to the panel in an advisory
capacity.
• No member of the panel will have a connection to the PGR, the supervisory team, or the
research project.
• A senior member of Doctoral Academy staff will attend the panel to provide
regulatory advice and guidance.
• The Panel will be convened by the College Dean for Research and Enterprise where the
outcome of a Level 2 investigation is not conclusive, or where the proposed outcome has
Level
3 panel process
consequences
for the candidate’s ongoing registration on the award.
• A face-to-face meeting of the College PGR Academic Integrity Panels is preferred, but
meetings may be conducted online where necessary. Meetings may be recorded.
• In the absence of suitable recording equipment, the Doctoral Academy will take a note of
the proceedings for subsequent circulation to attendees.
• The candidate may be invited to a College PGR Academic Integrity Panel meeting. Where
Chair of the Panel decides that this is appropriate the University will give the candidate
reasonable notice of the meeting, normally a minimum of 5 working days. The candidate
is strongly advised to be accompanied at the Panel by a friend or adviser from the
Student’s Union Advice Centre who may support the candidate but may not represent or
speak on behalf of the candidate, or take any active role in the meeting.
• The Panel may be rescheduled if the candidate has been invited but is unable to attend,
but if the candidate declines a second invitation, then it will proceed without their
attendance.
• A written statement by the candidate can be considered by the Panel if they are unable to
attend.
• The Panel will review the evidence, decide the outcome of the investigation, and where 22

required decide an appropriate outcome from the range available.
• The Chair of the Panel will write to the candidate informing them of the outcome decision
and any outcome, normally within 10 working days of the meeting. The outcome will
subsequently be reported to the Examining Board
• In addition to, or instead of an outcome decision and outcome from the range available at
3. above, the Panel may decide to refer the case for investigation under the University’s
Research Misconduct Procedures. In which case the candidate will be informed in writing
of this decision.

11.

The outcome to be imposed results in withdrawal of registration.

• Where the outcome decided by the Academic Integrity panel requires the PGR candidate
to withdraw, their registration will be terminated, and no award will be made. In such
cases the outcome decision will override any right of the candidate to defend their work
at a viva voce examination of their work.

12.

Additional procedures for the investigation of allegations arising during the
final assessment process for PGR awards.

• A PGR examiner who suspects a breach may have occurred while scrutinising the thesis
or submitted work prior to the viva should contact the Doctoral Academy as soon as
possible as at section 5. of these procedures above.
• Where concerns arise once the viva voce examining panel has assembled or during the
viva itself the examiner should raise their concern with the Independent Chair who is
responsible for the conduct of the viva.
• Following a brief discussion with the examining panel in camera (in private) the Chair will
decide whether the viva should continue or, in extremis, should be stopped. The
Independent Chair may contact the Doctoral Academy for advice on this point, and must
contact the Doctoral Academy immediately if it is deemed necessary to stop the viva.
• Where the viva continues the examiners may question the candidate about areas of
concern within the thesis/submitted work and this should be clearly recorded in the
examiners’ outcome report. If at the end of the viva the examiners are not confident that
the thesis/submitted work is the candidate’s own work, then this should be indicated in
the relevant section of the report.
• The Doctoral Academy will liaise with the relevant College Director of PGR to determine
the necessary course of action or ensuing investigation as per the procedures described
above.
• Where a breach of academic integrity is found to have occurred in the thesis/submitted
work after it has been examined but before the degree has been awarded, the Examining
Board may delay confirmation of the award while an investigation takes place. Subject to
the outcome of the investigation the decision of the examiners may then need to be
reconsidered, or the award may be withdrawn and the candidate’s registration
terminated.
• Where a serious breach of academic integrity is found to have occurred in a thesis or

23

submitted work after an award has been conferred, the University reserves the right to
investigate further and rescind the award if necessary, and to inform any journal or other
publication which the research contained within the PGR project has been published that a
breach of academic integrity or research misconduct has occurred.

Partnership students
The procedures detailed in this document also apply to students studying at UK partner
colleges and international partners.

UK Partnership students
• The partner is responsible for reporting all alleged breaches of academic integrity to
the relevant Faculty Academic Integrity Adviser at UWE.
• The partner has the responsibility for investigating and providing evidence of an
academic integrity breach to UWE.
• UWE has the final decision regarding the outcome of the investigation and will
communicate the decision to the student.

International partnership students
• The partner is responsible for reporting all alleged breaches of academic
integrity to the Partnerships Team at UWE.
• The partnership agreement confirms that identification and investigation of
breaches of academic integrity are conducted by the relevant Module Leader and
Academic Integrity Adviser at the partner location.
• UWE is informed of the outcome of the investigation into a breach of academic integrity
and the outcome recommended by the partner. UWE has the final decision regarding the
outcome of the investigation, so may request that the partner change the outcome.
• The partner is responsible for notifying the student of the outcome.

24
