UNIVERSITY ASSESSMENT POLICY
Yellow highlighted text identifies the most recent revisions to the document/ regulations.
If you require these revisions to be identified in an alternative format, please contact the
Academic Quality Unit.
Content
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11

12
13
14

15

Purpose
Terminology
Principles of Assessment and Feedback
Assessment Scheduling and Loading
Word Count Policy
Academic Referencing
Formative Assessment
Feedback to Students and Return of Student Assessments
Assessment Briefs and Assessment Criteria
Anonymous Marking
Verification, Standardisation and Moderation of Marking:
University minimum requirements for internal standardisation and
moderation of marking
University minimum requirements for external moderation of marking
Reassessment
Dissertation and Project Modules
Ownership and Archiving of Students' Assessed Work
Provision of information on assessment results for students to external
bodies

Appendix 1 - Guidance on designing module and course assessment strategies
Appendix 2 - Good Practice Principles for the management of Project and
Independent Study modules
Appendix 3 – Guidance on using numeric marks for student work
Appendix 4 – Guidance on course closures, major changes and implications for
student progression
Appendix 5 – Guidance on Standardisation and Moderation
Appendix 6 – Proforma for internal standardisation and moderation of marking
Appendix 7 - Providing feedback on student formative and summative
assessments: guidance for establishing a course team approach
Appendix 8 – Guidance for staff and students on proofreading and editing
Page 1 of 43

November 2025

1

Purpose

1.1

This Policy sets out principles, processes and good practice for the design and
management of student assessment at course and module level. It also explains
the quality assurance requirements for the approval and verification of
assessment items, and the requirements for standardisation and moderation of
student work. The Appendices to the Policy provide guidance on effective
practice.

1.2

All University awards and courses are subject to this Policy. Some courses, such
as those with professional, statutory, or regulatory body requirements, may have
approved variations to assessment regulations or policy, which will be clearly set
out in the Programme Specification and Course Handbook.

1.3

The Policy should be read with the Taught Courses Regulatory Framework
(TCRF). On matters of interpretation or application, queries should be made to
the Academic Registrar or Academic Quality Unit, as appropriate.

2

Terminology

Academic Integrity: is behaving in a way that is honest, trustworthy, fair, respectful and
responsible in assessment practice. This includes, for example, identifying all sources
used through referencing, using accurate data, clearly stating if work has been
submitted elsewhere, meeting ethical requirements, and making sure work represents
individual or group effort (where relevant).
Assessment: any activity which evaluates student learning and performance against
learning outcomes and criteria for that activity. Assessments can be formative (mainly
for giving feedback on performance and is not included in the mark for a module) or
summative (contributes to a module mark). Assessments can be practical or live (such
as laboratory tests or performances) or written (such as coursework or examinations).
Assessment Boards: there are two levels of assessment boards (Subject Assessment
Boards, and Board of Examiners):
Subject Assessment Board is the first level of Board responsible for:
a) Acting in line with Regulations and Procedures, meeting as needed after each
period of assessment.
b) Checking and approving assessment items and marking.
c) Confirming standards for modules.
d) Reviewing students’ module assessment performance.
e) Agreeing students’ module grades.
f) Receiving Mitigating Circumstances Committee decisions.
g) Receiving Academic Misconduct Committee decisions.
h) Recommending action to the appropriate Board of Examiners when a student
has failed an assessment.
Page 2 of 43

November 2025

Board of Examiners: is the second level of Board, responsible for:
a) Reviewing each student’s full profile of module results.
b) Making decisions about student progression.
c) Agreeing awards based on completed academic credit.
d) Ensuring requirements for awards have been met
e) Agreeing each student’s award and (where relevant) classification.
Assessment Brief: guidance for students on how to complete an assessment, what the
task is, how to present the work, the assessment criteria, and the marking scheme
(where used).
Assessment Criteria: explains the standards and qualities of student work to
successfully complete the assessment item linked to the course and module learning
outcomes. These may be generic or assessment specific.
Assessment Item: a task such as an essay, project, coursework assignment or
examination. Assessment items should be valid, reliable and authentic:
a) Validity ensures the assessment task measures student achievement of the
learning outcomes.
b) Reliability ensures assessment is accurate and can be repeated.
c) Authenticity means assessments ask students to demonstrate skills and
capabilities from problems and situations in the ‘real’ world.
Assessment Literacy: knowledge and understanding of the principles of sound
assessment practice, including the design and management of assessment to
encourage engagement with learning.
Assessment Rubric: a marking grid on Blackboard or Turnitin® to give students
feedback from standard options.
Formative Assessment: any activity that leads to developmental feedback (or
feedforward) for students about their learning. It is not graded; this means that it is not
used in the mark for a module.
Grade Descriptors: are linked to assessment criteria and explain the usual standard
needed for a band of marks or class of degree at undergraduate and postgraduate
levels. Course and/or subject teams use the University generic grade descriptors in
setting criteria and grade descriptors for courses, subjects or assessments.
Marking Scheme: a way of assigning marks to features of an assessment. Marking
schemes are optional but may be used by courses or subjects.
Moderation: a way of checking the application of assessment criteria (and related
feedback) to be sure that the standard of awards (known as academic standards) are
consistent, reliable and fair. Summative assessment is moderated internally and
externally:
Internal Moderation: is done by academic staff to check: the quality of feedback given
to students; and that the mark for assessment work is fair and reliable. Internal
Page 3 of 43

November 2025

moderation is usually done on a sample of assessment work and can be unseen
(sometimes called ‘blind’) or seen (‘non-blind’) double marking.
External Moderation: is done by experienced academic staff (‘external examiners’) that
work at other higher education providers and so are independent of the University.
External examiners check that the level of assessments and students’ work meets the
required academic standards and is in line with similar programmes nationally. They
comment on the quality of feedback and how well assessments are managed.
Reassessment: the opportunity to complete an assessment again following a failed
summative assessment.
Standardisation: ensures everyone on a course or module team understands the
expected standards of marking and feedback.
Summative Assessment: is any assessment that contributes to the module mark.
Verification: ensures assessments and related briefs are fair, valid and challenging in
terms of academic standards.

3

Principles of Assessment and Feedback

3.1

Assessment is an important part of the course design process to ensure course
and module learning experiences are effectively aligned and sector-recognised
standards are maintained. It is expected that:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

3.2

Module assessments are informed by a planned and integrated approach
to course design to enable academic progression
Assessments align with course aims and learning outcomes
Assessment strategies and course design include opportunities for
formative assessment linked to summative assessment
Assessment tasks are checked for validity and reliability and are verified to
confirm academic standards and fairness
Marking and grading of student work (including any classification) is
informed by sector-recognised standards, to ensure that the awards are
trusted and credible
Students are assessed on technical proficiency in English language in a
way that links to the level and content of the course or module
The possibility of academic misconduct (for example plagiarism,
unauthorised collaboration or use of unauthorised materials) by students is
minimised.

Understanding academic requirements and academic integrity is established
through the development of staff and student ‘assessment and feedback literacy’.
It is expected that:
• Opportunities for students to develop assessment literacy are part of
module and course learning activities
• Learning activities develop a shared understanding of academic standards
and assessment criteria
Page 4 of 43

November 2025

• Student induction includes activities that develop student understanding of
academic integrity
• Students are made aware of University guidance on proofreading and
editing (see appendix 8)
• Peer assessment and self-assessment are used to help students
understand the assessment process
• Developing assessment literacy means students become self-regulating
and effectively understand and use feedback to develop confidence
• Staff engage with professional development opportunities to further
develop assessment literacy
• Annual evaluation processes provide opportunities to monitor, evaluate
and develop assessment and feedback processes.
3.3

Assessment and feedback are inclusive. This means that they meet the
requirements of equality legislation and good practice, and develop students’
learning through partnership and dialogue. It is expected that:
• Assessments are inclusive by design, and where needed, reasonable
adjustments are made
• Assessment design takes into account the range of student backgrounds,
experiences, identities and aims
• Assessment is planned and co-ordinated at a course level to provide
appropriate elements of choice and flexibility for students
• Assessments, assessment criteria, and assessment rubrics are accessible,
clear, and understandable for students
• Feedback on assessments is accessible, constructive and timely
• Students have opportunities to discuss assessment feedback with tutors
• Course teams monitor attainment outcomes and gaps between different
social groups and take appropriate action to reduce gaps.

3.4

Formative and summative assessments are planned, so that students can use
feedback for summative assessments. This means that assessment and
feedback includes:
Assessment as learning:
• Assessment should enable students to learn about themselves as learners
and to reflect on their learning
Assessment for learning:
• Assessment should engage students in purposeful and positive learning
Assessment of learning:
• There should be a balance of formative and summative assessments
throughout a course so that assessment tasks are valid and reliable tests
of student learning
• Assessment outcomes should also provide information on how effective
the course is and how well the content, learning, teaching, and
assessments meet the aims and learning outcomes of the course.

Page 5 of 43

November 2025

4

Assessment Scheduling and Loading

4.1

Each module specification explains (as shown below) its summative assessments
including what is needed to pass the module (such as having to pass each
assessment item). Module assessments must be formally approved.

Assessment Word or time
item
length

Weighting Learning outcomes to
be assessed

Anonymous
marking

4.2

Course and module assessments should consider the guidance in Appendix 1 on
assessment design, organisation and timing which aims to ensure similar
experience of the volume of assessment across different modules and courses.

4.3

End-of-module examinations take place in the last week of the semester, or at
scheduled times in the academic year as described in the Course Handbook.

4.4

All formal examinations, including in-class tests must be well-planned, accurate
and fair, and securely carried out. This includes arrangements for:
•
•
•
•
•
•

Reasonable adjustments tor disabled students.
Verification of test papers/activities, including security at all times.
Students unable to attend the assessment, for example because of
mitigating circumstances.
Arrangements for internal and external moderation.
How results are recorded.
For multiple choice tests, how the pass mark is decided (see Appendix 3).

4.5

Course teams should regularly check assessment scheduling across modules to
avoid ‘bunching’ of hand-in dates (where possible). Assessment deadlines are
normally during scheduled assessment weeks in semester/term dates.

4.6

Course teams should tell students when and where assessment information will
be published (e.g. at the start of the module, in the module outline, or on the
virtual learning environment (VLE) X weeks before the submission deadline).
Students should be given a schedule of assessment deadlines and feedback
dates.

5

Word Count Policy

5.1

Word counts show the maximum length of an assessment item. Where relevant,
assessment briefs should state a maximum word count, with a +10% margin. This
means that work more than 10% over the word count will not be marked.

5.2

The word count normally applies to the main body of the text (including tables in
the main text). Everything before and after the main body is excluded (such as,
where relevant, abstract, acknowledgements, contents, executive summaries,
references, bibliographies, appendices etc.). Any different approach than this
should be clearly explained in the module brief. Students should be given clear
information on the use of appendices etc.

Page 6 of 43

November 2025

5.3

There is no penalty for going over the word count, but it should be made clear that
the marker will not consider work more than 10% over the word count. Students
are encouraged to write concisely and within the word count.

5.4

A similar +10% time limit approach is used for live or pre-recorded presentation
assessments.

6

Academic Referencing

6.1

It is recognised that accurate referencing using a defined style is an academic
skill. At undergraduate level the focus should be on students understanding and
application of the principles of referencing to demonstrate:
•
•
•

when and why to quote others and use references
identify citations
consistency in use of a referencing style.

6.2

Undergraduate assessment criteria should focus on accurate and consistent
citation and use of references. It should not focus on, for example, stylistic
accuracy or use of a particular version of Harvard referencing.

6.3

For undergraduate students a single referencing style for their subject should be
identified. For most subjects this will be Harvard (Cite Them Right version) but
may be (for example) APA for Psychology, OSCOLA for Law, MHRA for History
and English Literature, Vancouver for medical subjects. Library Services’
referencing webpages include a list of the referencing style used by each subject:
https://library.worc.ac.uk/guides/study-skills/referencing.

6.4

The referencing styles for each subject will be identified for Joint Honours
students, although in practice most Joint Honours students will be studying two
subjects that use the same style. The expectation is that, by level 6, Joint
Honours students will be able to use the style/s appropriate to their subjects.
Library Services provide support for students using different styles.

6.5

Unless otherwise agreed by the Learning, Teaching and Student Experience
Committee, only the official Worcester styles should be used. Course
Handbooks, including module outlines, should clearly state the referencing style
that is used by the School/subject and direct students to the official guidance for
that style on the Library Services webpages

6.6

There is no set referencing system for postgraduate and research students as
they are expected to have an in-depth understanding of academic referencing.
Schools and supervisors should give guidance on expected referencing style.

7

Formative Assessment

7.1

All courses should have formative assessments, and all modules should include
some element of formative assessment.

Page 7 of 43

November 2025

7.2

Formative assessments are not graded which means they are not used in the
mark for a module. They are used to improve student learning and can include
peer-assessment and self-assessment as well as tutor-assessment.

7.3

Formative assessment feedback given by tutors early in a module is particularly
important at level 4, when students may be new to higher education. Early
assessment can be helpful in identifying students who require support in
developing their academic writing.

7.4

Within the first four to six weeks of semester one of level 4, all courses should set
a formative assessment linked to a mandatory module. This will normally be a
written assessment submitted using Turnitin®. Students should receive written
feedback on the formative assessment, including on their technical proficiency in
English and given the opportunity to review and discuss the Turnitin originality
report. Further information is available in the Turnitin Policy.

7.5

Staff should make sure feedback on formative assessments is given well before
summative assessment deadlines.

8

Feedback to Students and Return of Student Assessments

8.1

Feedback should be given on all formative and summative assessments,
including examinations. To be effective and timely, feedback on student work
should identify strengths and where improvements could be made in future.

8.2

Feedback may be given before assessment items are returned to students. This
includes giving general feedback in class or via the VLE, to make sure students
have speedy feedback (taking account of the seven days post-deadline period)
whilst assessments are still fresh in their mind. General feedback can include
model answers, anonymised student work from previous years, exemplars,
reports on what was done well and common errors/ weaknesses, peer
discussions etc.

8.3

Feedback on assessments should:
a) support learning and improve future assessment performance by identifying
areas for development and/or setting targets or goals
b) clearly link to learning outcomes and assessment criteria
c) provide students with an understanding of how their grade was decided and
how well they met the learning outcomes
d) be consistent with the course team approach for assessment feedback
e) be provided electronically and within twenty working days of the submission
deadline.

8.4

For fairness and equity, there should be a course team approach to giving
feedback, so that all students receive a similar volume and style of feedback.
Guidance on establishing a course team approach to feedback is in Appendix 7.

8.5

Assessments should usually be marked, moderated, and returned to students
with personalised feedback, and the grade entered onto the student record
system, within twenty working days of the date of submission. Where this is not
Page 8 of 43

November 2025

possible, the course leader should inform the relevant students of the delay and
the expected date the assessment will be returned.
8.6

Examination feedback should be given and may be general (such as an
‘examiner’s report’ on each question or similar). Additionally (or as an option)
students may be given the opportunity to discuss their examination script to get
individual feedback: module briefs should set out if this is possible. Except for
multiple-choice examinations and tests where questions are taken from a
question bank, students can see their marked examination script. Completed
examination scripts, however, are the property of the University.

9

Assessment Briefs and Assessment Criteria

9.1

For each assessment item students should be given an assessment (or
assignment) brief which includes written guidance that explains the nature of the
assessment item, how it should be presented, and the assessment/grade criteria.

9.2

Assessment briefs include:
a) How the assessment links to the module learning outcomes and skills
required
b) Any requirements such as word limits and referencing style and the need for
good English
c) Assessment criteria used to judge the quality of a student’s work
d) Any marking scheme and/or grade descriptors
e) Submission instructions and deadlines, including what happens if work is
incomplete, submitted late, or not submitted
f) arrangements for standardisation and/or moderation if these are specific to
the course/subject or assessment.

9.3

Course/subject teams should decide how they will specify and use assessment
criteria and grade descriptors, so that a consistent approach is used. Criteria may
be specified for each individual assessment item or for different types of
assessments (such as essays, laboratory reports, presentations). Criteria should
always be shared with students as part of the assessment brief.

9.4

Course teams should make sure assessment criteria are benchmarked to the
University’s grade descriptors, and take account of sector-recognised standards,
the UK Quality Code for Higher Education and subject benchmark statements as
appropriate.

9.5

Assessment criteria should be verified internally to assure academic standards.

9.6

Assessment criteria should be discussed with students, and assessment
feedback given to students should be in line with assessment criteria.

9.7

Subject Assessment Boards are formally responsible for reviewing and verifying
all summative assessment items (including reassessments), and assessment
criteria, before they are made available to students. The Subject Assessment
Board may delegate this task to the course/subject team.

Page 9 of 43

November 2025

9.8

Internally verified assessment items and assessment criteria (and, where
appropriate, assessment briefs) including examination papers should be shared
with the external examiner for comment. Course/subject teams should agree with
external examiners whether external consideration of assessment items and
assessment criteria (including marking schemes/grids or model answers or
similar) will be done before assessment briefs are given to students, or
alternatively done alongside the external moderation of student work.

9.9

Internally and externally verified assessments, including examination papers for
both first and reassessments, must be completed prior to induction for semester 1
assessments, and by the end of November for semester 2 assessments.

10

Anonymous Marking

10.1

Where possible student work should be marked anonymously to reduce the
possibility of conscious or unconscious bias. This means that markers and
examiners do not know the identity of the student whose work they are
considering. To do this only a reference number (usually the student number) is
on the submitted work. Work remains anonymous until the assessment mark (as
a provisional mark) has been entered on the student record system.

10.2

It is recognised that some types of assessment, such as presentations or practical
examinations cannot be marked anonymously as the students can be identified.
Assessments that should be marked anonymously include most written
assignments such as essays or reports, and formal written examinations and
tests.

11

Verification, Standardisation and Moderation of Marking

11.1

Verification, standardisation and moderation are used to ensure academic
standards are appropriate and consistent across modules and courses (see
guidance in Appendix 5. They also make sure markers adhere to agreed
assessment policies and assessment criteria, including the agreed approach to
provision of feedback, and that the assessment outcomes for students are fair
and reliable. For some courses (such as those leading to medical qualifications),
standards-setting applies to identify the pass/fail requirements for an assessment.

Minimum requirements for internal standardisation and moderation of marking
11.2

Assessments must be verified internally before being shared with students.

11.3

Course/subject teams must include a statement of their standardisation and
moderation procedures in the Student Course Handbook. The statement should
explain how decisions are made about the validity and reliability of marking and
grading, and the quality of feedback for different types of assessment, e.g. written
assignments, formal examinations, presentations, group work, etc.

11.4

The statement of standardisation and moderation procedures must explain how
differences between markers are resolved (e.g. discussion between markers,
using a third marker). For sample double marking, normally the process will agree

Page 10 of 43

November 2025

the standard of marking but where this is not agreed, the statement must provide
for the review of student work and/or the cohort marks.
11.5

The statement of standardisation and moderation procedures must explain how
the moderation process will be recorded and what the outcome of the moderation
was (see Appendix 6 for a standard moderation report).

11.6

Where a course is taught at different sites or at different partner organisations, the
statement must specify the arrangements for assuring standards across the sites
and /or partnerships.

11.7

Minimum requirements apply for standardisation and for internal moderation of
summative assignments and examinations as follows:
a) Standardisation on an annual basis where modules are delivered across
different sites or partnerships and for large teaching teams
b) Work that is first marked by new inexperienced staff will be double marked
c) Standardisation to make sure there is consistency between markers must
take place before marking begins on an assessment that has multiple
markers
d) Projects and dissertations weighted 30 credits or more must be blind double
marked
e) Assessments marked in the pass/fail boundary (all grade E and a sample of
grade D-) must be non-blind double marked
f) Fails must be sampled through non-blind marking
g) A sample of assessments from across all passing grade bands (to include the
highest graded assessment), must be moderated as follows –
Number of assessment
pieces that have passed
<7

Minimum sample size for moderation
(excluding failed work)
All pieces of work

7 - 59

6 pieces of work across all grade bands
including work in the highest category
10% of work across all grade bands
including work in the highest category
20 pieces of work across all grade bands
including work in the highest category

60 - 199
200 or more
11.8

Internal moderation should be completed within the 20-working day assessment
feedback period and before provisional marks are shared with students. External
moderation can take place after the 20-working day period.

11.9

Assessed work, feedback and provisional marks may be shared with students
before external moderation is finished, as marks must be agreed by the relevant
assessment board. The ‘subject to confirmation by the Exam Board' status of
marks must be made clear to students.

Minimum requirements for external moderation of marking
11.10 After the first year of delivery, assessments for level 4 modules in three-year
degree courses are not normally externally moderated.
Page 11 of 43

November 2025

11.11 Course teams should consult with external examiners to agree a schedule for
standardisation and internal and external moderation of assessments, so that this
is not all done at the end of the semester/year.
11.12 For each module they examine, external examiners must be given:
a) A sample of student work (in line with minimum requirements – see below)
b) The module outline
c) Examination papers and/or assessment briefs
d) Assessment and grade criteria
e) Provisional statistical marks profile for the modules they are responsible for
f) Records of internal moderation.
11.13 External examiners are not expected to settle disagreement between first and
second markers. Unless the internal markers agree there has been an error that
must be corrected, external examiners are not expected to change individual
marks for student work.
11.14 Where student work is made available to external examiners electronically, it is
good practice to give them access to all pieces of work, so they can choose their
own sample for moderation. For cohorts with large numbers of students or
modules, the arrangement for sampling should be agreed with the external
examiner, for example a pre-selected/recommended sample. To help do this a
list of all students and provisional grades should be given to the external
examiner.
11.15 Where a sample is selected or recommended to the external examiner, this must
be a minimum sample of 15% student assessment work for each module they
examine. The sample should cover all grade bands, and student work in the
highest and fail categories. For cohorts with less than 6 students all work should
be given to the external examiner. Normally the sample size for an item of
assessment will be between 9 and 25 pieces of work.
Number of
pieces of work
< 10

Minimum sample size for external moderation
(including failed work)
All pieces of work

10 - 59
60 – 166

9 pieces of work across all grade bands including
work in highest and fail categories
15% of work across all grade bands

167 or more

25 pieces of work across all grade bands

11.16 The external examiner should use the sample to make sure marking standards
are appropriate, feedback is consistent and of appropriate quality, and internal
moderation has been effective. The sample should not be the same that has been
internally moderated.
11.17 Where a course or module is taught at more than one site, the external examiner
should be provided with the provisional statistical marks profile for each site, so
they can comment on the marking and student achievement standards for each
site. If the provisional marks profile shows significant differences, the external
Page 12 of 43

November 2025

examiner and/or the Board of Examiners may require a review or re-marking to be
done.
11.18 In relation to reassessment, external moderation of students’ work is normally
unnecessary and internal moderation provides the necessary confirmation of
standards. Exceptions include, for example, where there was a high number of
failed assessments at the first sit; in these circumstances the sample submitted
for external moderation should be proportionate. External examiners may also be
given a sample of reassessments for moderation purposes on request.
12

Reassessment

12.1

The decision on whether a student has passed a given assessment and a
module, and whether they have an opportunity for reassessment or to retake the
modules can only be confirmed by a properly constituted Subject Assessment
Board and Board of Examiners.

12.2

The reassessment requirements for failed assessments can be shared with
students before a Board of Examiners has confirmed grades and module results,
but students should be reminded that grades are provisional until confirmed. This
means that a provisional ‘fail’ grade can be turned into a ‘pass’ grade or the other
way round by the Board of Examiners. Students should be given guidance about
completing reassessments along with studying for new modules.

12.3

The TCRF expects reassessment to normally involve a new task, and to take
place at the end of the academic year during the summer reassessment period.
The exception to this relates to Level 4 modules only.

12.4

For level 4 modules only, the following applies:
a) Reassessment should, where appropriate, be a re-working of the original
piece of work and also include a short reflective statement on how feedback
from the first attempt was used
b) Where reassessment is a new assessment item, this should be given to
students when the original marked assessment is returned
c) The deadline for reassessment submission is normally the end of year
summer reassessment period, but students can submit reassessment work
earlier to plan their submission to manage their workload
d) Reassessment work will be marked after the July reassessment submission
deadline.
e) In 2024/25 for level 4 only, reassessment of failed semester 1 modules will
take place in early March 2025.

12.5

Courses should review fail rates for all modules at first sit and following
reassessment annually as part of the annual evaluation process. Where fail at
first sit rates are 20% or above, module leaders are required to complete a
‘module review’ template to: identify the pass/fail rate at first sit and at
reassessment for the current and the previous year; provide a commentary on
the reasons for the fail rate; and set actions for improvement. Forms should be
reviewed by Head of Department, and progress on actions should be reviewed
in January and March, by updating the template.

13

Dissertation and Project Modules
Page 13 of 43

November 2025

13.1

Most undergraduate Honours degree courses, including Integrated Masters
courses, have a 30 credit (or larger) Dissertation or Project module. Rules apply
to these modules/assessments regarding the submission of the final assessments
(normally the report).

13.2

Final assessments for all Dissertations and Project modules have a standard
deadline for submission, as identified in the University calendar. This deadline
may be varied for courses that have students on professional placements at this
time. To do this course leaders should contact the Academic Registrar and the
Academic Quality Unit.

13.3

Final assessments for all Dissertations and Project modules will be submitted
electronically via Turnitin®.

13.4

Students with mitigating circumstances can request an extension to the
submission deadline for their Dissertation or Project final assessment. The
procedure for requesting an extension can be found on the Registry Services
webpages https://www.worcester.ac.uk/registryservices/649.htm.

13.5

The University has developed good practice principles for management of
Dissertation and Project modules that explain the responsibilities of supervisors
and students. This is at Appendix 2.

14

Ownership and Archiving of Students' Assessed Work

14.1

Students hold the intellectual property in all assessment work they do, but the
assessment material they produce (essays, projects, examination scripts,
dissertations, artworks, computer disks, etc) is the property of the University. This
means that assessment work can be kept by the University while marks are being
considered by assessment boards and during appeals and quality reviews.
Except for examination scripts, the University generally makes assessed work
available for collection and/or tries to return assessed work when this has been
asked for. Tutors are responsible for returning assessed work.

14.2

Assessed work not collected by the student will be kept for six months after the
relevant Examination Board, when it will be confidentially destroyed by the
School.

15

Provision of information on assessment results for students to external
bodies

15.1

On occasion students or staff may be requested to provide information on
assessment results by, for example, employers or admissions staff at other higher
education providers, in terms of an overall % mark achieved for the degree.

15.2

Students or staff requested to provide information on achievement outcomes in
terms of % marks, for example, postgraduate study courses, employment
opportunities or references, should contact the Academic Registrar for a
statement.

Page 14 of 43

November 2025

Related Policies, Documents or Webpages
Taught Courses Regulatory Framework [accessed on 12.10.2022]
Generic Grade Descriptors (Levels 4 - 7) [accessed on 12.10.2022]
Grade Descriptors - Level 8 [accessed on 12.10.2022]
Mitigating circumstances via Registry Services webpages [accessed on 12.10.2022]
Assessment Criteria Working for All: Guiding Staff to Support Students [accessed on
12.10.2022]

Page 15 of 43

November 2025

Approval/Review Table
Item
Version Number
Date of Approval
Approved by
Effective from
Policy Officer
Department
Review date

Last reviewed
Policies superseded by this
version
Equality Impact Assessment
(EIA)
Accessibility Checked

Recent changes
Committee
n/a

UEB

Date
November
2025
September
2024
July 2024

ASQEC

June 2024

ASQEC

March 2024

LTSEC

June 2023

Academic
Board

October
2022

LTSEC
n/a

September
2021
July 2021

LTSEC

June 2021

LTSEC

June 2020

ASQEC

Notes
Version 2.4
12th October 2022
Academic Board
Immediate
Head of AQU
Academic Quality Unit
Annual – July 2025 – A review is in progress to update this
policy and incorporate our “Policy and procedures on inclusive
assessment, reasonable adjustments and alternative
assessment arrangements for students with impairments or
disabilities”. The existing version of both policies remain in force
until the review is completed and a new version is approved.
July 2024
Assessment Policy dated July 2021, v1.5
July 2022
July 2024

Change
Appendix 7 Section 4 amended to reference correct Policy section
(formative assessment). Policy now under review.
Early reassessment at level 4 during 2024/25.Link to retention of
work removed. Reference to Director of QED removed.
Item 12.5 amended to bring into line with Student Outcomes
document taken to UEB
Item 5.4 amended to include “live” or pre-recorded presentation
assessments.
Updated proforma for internal moderation (Appendix 6);
clarification of responsibilities of internal moderators; inclusion of
opportunity for External Examiners to comment
on moderation at module level.
Addition of appendix 8; clarification that external moderation of
reassessments not normally required, reference to mid-year
reassessment for semester 1 15 credit module fails, and
minor recalibration of grades to % marking table in appendix 3,
typo correction in 11.13.
Assessment Policy subject to a comprehensive review and
update, with a focus on the use of plain English. Sections 3.13.3 revised and document checked for currency.
Full details of changes to be found in ASQE paper 21/69 (meeting
on 13.7.2022).
Section 15 added.
Para 13.5 – reference to a specific academic year removed.
9 - Feedback to Students and Return of Student Assessments –
para 9.4 added to take account of new Appx 7
Appx 7 Providing feedback on student formative and
summative assessments: guidance for establishing a course team
approach – new section
5 - W o r d Count Policy – para 5.3 minor revision
Page 16 of 43

November 2025

Appendix 1
Guidance on designing module and course assessment strategies
1

Taking a course overview

The assessment for an individual module or unit must be aligned with the learning
outcomes. However, it is also essential that an overview is taken of the design,
scheduling and loading of assessment across modules at each level and for the course
as a whole. Assessment should be seen as an integral part of learning, and thus
particular consideration must be given to how students develop skills in relation to the
various forms of assessment required by a course. Learning opportunities, formative
assessment and feedback, and progression through and between levels should all be
aligned and planned strategically. The following should be considered:
a)
b)

c)
d)
e)
f)
g)
h)

i)

2

the balance, integration and scheduling of formative and summative assessments
an appropriate diversity of assessment modes and tasks are integral to good
assessment practice (but note too much diversity or unplanned diversity can be
counter-productive; for this purpose the approval of courses will require an
assessment map showing assessment types and weightings associated with
modules at each level of the course)
the assessments taken together should ensure that all of the course learning
outcomes are tested at the level of the final qualification
students following different pathways or specialist routes through courses should
not be able to avoid certain assessment modes/tasks if these are essential for
testing course level learning outcomes
where courses have significant choice between modules, consideration should be
given to the role of such modules in the overall assessment strategy
the balance of assessment over the course of a semester/academic year should
be carefully planned – and for this purpose, the approval of courses will require
an assessment calendar/schedule
at level 4 students should benefit from early (within the first 4-6 weeks) formative
feedback on assessment
arrangements should be in place for verification of assessments to ensure
equivalence in terms of demand (both academically and in terms of student effort)
across modules; this should include consideration of assessment requirements
for mandatory modules and also for optional modules
the overall word count required for a level/year of a course should be reviewed, to
ensure it is reasonable, with generally a maximum of 10,000 words being
required at Levels 4 and 5, and 16,000 in the final year of an Honours degree.
Taking the module view

In designing the assessment details for a module or course unit, account should be
taken of the following:
a)

b)

the total student effort hours represented by the credit weighting of the module,
and the proportions of this total available for formal taught sessions, independent
study and assessment (for example, low contact and high independent study may
require more staged assessment)
although students’ motivation, background, skills and abilities will make any
assessment task more difficult and time-consuming for some than others, as a
rough guide a 2,000 word essay might represent a minimum of 30 hours of
Page 17 of 43

November 2025

c)

d)

e)

f)

g)

h)
i)
j)

student effort time for the ‘average’ student (taking into account research,
planning, drafting, editing and proofreading)
reliance on a single assessment for a module (e.g. a single examination or one
piece of course work) will mean that a student’s fate in the module depends on
that single item of assessment; in such cases the teaching and learning strategy
for the module should be designed so that students can benefit from formative
feedback before the single summative assessment
alternatively, and particularly for larger modules, it may be more appropriate for 2
or 3 items of assessment (both/all of which contribute to the overall module
grade), and that these are scheduled such that the student can receive feedback
on the first assessment before they complete the second assessment
there are many innovative approaches to assessment that do not fit either of the
above alternatives; innovation is encouraged, and teams/individuals who wish to
do something different are encouraged to explore this with advice from AQU and
Registry Services as appropriate
careful consideration must be given to the alignment of the assessment task(s)
with the learning outcomes and any rules for passing the module:
• where the assessments each assess different learning outcomes, it may be
appropriate to specify that students must achieve a minimum pass grade in
each assessment – however, this means that there are additional points at
which a student may fail the module
• it may be appropriate to test the learning outcomes through more than one
assignment – to permit a student to redeem an initial failure by an
improved performance in a second task
in the light of the above, consideration might be given to assessment strategies
that:
• are staged to permit students to benefit from feedback to re-work/develop
further aspects of an assignment
• permit students to engage in multiple learning assignments and submit for
summative assessment their best e.g. two out of three pieces of work
• require students to submit a portfolio of work with a commentary on how the
learning outcomes have been met (NB this does not all have to be marked
at the end)
the weighting of an individual assessment item should normally reflect its value as
contribution to the total amount of assessment for the module as indicated in the
assessment table and guidance below
normally no single summative assessment task should contribute less than 25%
to the overall mark
normally there should be no more than two summative assignments for 15 credit
modules, and a maximum of four assignments for a 30 credit module.

3

Assessment load: guidance on equivalence and weighting

3.1

The assessment table below is intended to provide guidance for course teams
and Schools, in constructing and approving assessment strategies for modules.
It should be interpreted flexibly, taking account of the general principles outlined
above.

3.2

The guidance is indicative and should not be regarded as prescriptive in relation
to either word/time limits or weightings. It is provided only as a reference point in
order to have some benchmark within which module assessment design can take
place. It relates to summative assessment, and it is expected that all modules
provide opportunities for formative assessment in some form. It should not be
Page 18 of 43

November 2025

assumed that the assessment for a 30 credit module is inevitably double that of a
15 credit module.
3.3

The table is based on the principle of equivalence, where a 2-3,000 word essay
or report is regarded as equivalent to a 2 hour formal examination, or a 4,000
word reflective learning journal, or a set of laboratory reports representing
practical work over a semester. Please remember this is guidance only, and
should not be interpreted mechanistically; it is not recommended that
assignments are set with word length indicators other than rounded numbers of
1,000, 1,500, 2,000, 2,500 etc. i.e. it is not expected that the table below is
followed precisely in terms of word counts etc.

3.4

It is expected that shorter word limits will be used in the early stages of a course,
and selective use of longer word limits for later stages.

Indicative guidance on module summative assessment loadings

Assessment type
Examinations
3 hour formal examination
2 hour formal examination
1 hour formal examination or test
Essays/Reports
2,000 - 3,000 words essay/report
1,500 - 2,000 words written assignment
1,000 - 1,500 words written assignment
Reflective journals/logs
4,000 words/12 week reflective journal/learning log
2,000 words/6 week reflective journal/learning log
Laboratory/practical reports
12 week equivalent Laboratory/practical report file
6 week equivalent Laboratory/practical report file
Oral presentations
15-20 minute individual oral/poster presentation and
written summary/account/research
10-15 minute individual oral/poster presentation
Group presentation + report or poster

Page 19 of 43

Indicative
weighting
15 credit
modules

Indicative
weighting
30 credit
modules

n/a
75/100%
40/50%

75/100%
40/50%
25/30%

75/100%
50/60%
40/50%

60/70%
40/50%
25/30%

100%
50%

50%
25/30%

100%

50%
25/30%

100%

50%

40/50%
50%

25/30%
30%

November 2025

Appendix 2
Good Practice Principles for the management of Project and Dissertation modules
General Principles
1

Dissertation and Project modules should normally include a small number of
taught sessions (minimum of four) for the whole cohort to cover practical matters
associated with the Dissertation or Project, including refreshers on research
methods, ethical approval, supervision, time management, responsibilities etc.

2

Arrangements for the management and supervision of undergraduate final year
Dissertation or Project modules must:
a) provide guidance and constructive feedback to enable students to develop
feasible and manageable projects against the learning outcomes for the
module
b) foster in students independence in the analysis and/or application of
knowledge, and a willingness to take responsibility for their own learning
c) ensure student progress is effectively monitored.

3

Management and supervisory arrangements should be transparent and made
available in written form via a module, Project, or Dissertation handbook to all
staff and students. This could be in the form of a learning agreement, and in all
cases should include:
a)
b)
c)
d)
e)

nature, number and frequency of supervisory meetings
who has primary responsibility for initiating meetings
arrangements for approving the project/dissertation topic/title
requirements for securing ethical approval
arrangements for feedback on draft text.

4

There should be clear and published procedures for the choice/allocation of
project/dissertation topics and staff supervisors.

5

Students should be allocated to supervisors who have a generally appropriate
academic background and/or research interests.

6

There should be explicit mechanisms for addressing any problems or concerns
raised by students which cannot be resolved within the framework of the
supervisory relationship, for example, referral to the module leader or the course
leader.

7

There should be a clear policy adhered to by all members of a course team
engaged in supervision of undergraduate final year Projects or Dissertations
regarding frequency of regular meetings, in the order of, for example, 30 minutes
every six weeks (or more frequently if a student is completing over one
semester).

8

There should be clarity across the course team and for all parties about the
relative responsibility of the student and the supervisor for initiating supervisory
Page 20 of 43

November 2025

meetings, follow-up, and recording of meetings.
9

All text-based work must be word processed and submitted electronically in
accordance with University policy.

The Student’s Responsibilities
1

Reading and putting into practice the guidance in the handbook (noting in
particular information on record-keeping and assessment).

2

Observing health and safety, data protection and ethical protocols, including
completion of documents related to ethics approval.

3

Planning and managing the time commitment required of the module/Project/
Dissertation.

4

Initiating and agreeing a written plan of work and a timetable of meetings with
their supervisor.

5

Keeping a Project diary or log-book as a means of monitoring progress and
recording the outcomes of meetings.

6

Discussing progress with their supervisor and responding to guidance and
constructive criticism, and understanding that the supervisor should not be
expected to predict the grade for the Dissertation or Project.

The Supervisor’s Responsibilities
1

Advising on the student’s work plan and agreeing a schedule of meetings (which
can be virtual or face-to-face), and responsibilities in initiating and recording the
outcome of meetings.

2

Ensuring that students are aware of the role of the supervisor and the anticipated
extent of support in terms of providing direction, time allocated to meetings,
reading and commentating on drafts, etc.

3

Monitoring student progress and providing timely, honest and constructive
feedback, and following up non-attendance at scheduled meetings, if necessary,
using the University referral mechanisms.

4

Seeking to ensure that the work is being conducted within agreed protocols
(including those relating to ethics and to health and safety).

5

Keeping a brief record of meetings and student progress, which can be stored on
SOLE.

6

Complying with policy on providing feedback on draft text, which is normally that a
supervisor will read and comment on one draft of specific sections of the
Dissertation /Project provided it is submitted for comment within a reasonable
time ahead of the submission deadline or by the published deadline for
commenting on drafts, or deadlines if submitted in part/s.

Page 21 of 43

November 2025

7

Being familiar with the formal assessment procedures and criteria.

8

Avoiding giving the student premature or potentially misleading information on
marks or grades.

Dissertation or Project Handbooks
The handbook (which is normally provided electronically via Blackboard) should provide
the key source of information for students and staff. Module leaders may find useful the
suggested list of contents below (but this is not intended to be prescriptive or
comprehensive).
Contents:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Module aims and learning outcomes.
Assessment requirements, criteria and procedures.
Schedule for any taught sessions.
Topic choice (or allocation) and approval.
Advisory/supervisory arrangements.
Securing ethical approval and ethics protocols, including data protection
where appropriate.
Staff and student responsibilities.
Notes on progress meetings.
Plan of work, timetable and submission dates(s).
The characteristics of a good project.
Structure, format and length.
Referencing, academic integrity and avoidance of plagiarism.
Alternative forms of presentation.
Health and safety: risk assessment.
Arrangements for extensions and mitigating circumstances.

Page 22 of 43

November 2025

Appendix 3
Guidance on using numeric marks for assessment of student work
Rationale for the use of marking in grades rather than percentages
The generic undergraduate or postgraduate grade descriptors apply to all summativelyassessed work. They are set out according to the grade system used at University of
Worcester and mapped on to the conventional categories or sub-divisions of the
honours degree in UK Higher Education, or other classification systems as appropriate.
It should be noted that the grade system is represented by letters rather than numbers
(numbers are only used to calculate an overall grade from two or more weighted
assessments).
The grade descriptors are built on the acknowledgement that grading student work is not
an exact science. It is a matter for professional academic judgment. This means that
the category descriptions indicate the general characteristics of different types of work
which lead to their assignment to particular categories. There is a reasonable argument
that it is not realistic to indicate that such fine-grained decisions as those between
awarding 67 or 68 percent are objectively defensible but that broad descriptive bands of
B+, B and B- are as specific as it is appropriate to operate.
The implication of these points is that, in most circumstances it is inappropriate to use
precise numerical grading on student work.
Approaches to marking multiple choice tests and examinations and similar
Colleagues may find it appropriate and helpful as part of their assessment diet, to use
assessment approaches which have traditionally used numeric grading, such as multiple
question exams, multiple choice tests and computer-based tests. The use of numerical
grades in these cases is largely to arrive at an overall grade based on numerous small
responses to assessment questions. Staff may also wish to allocate percentages to
each individual sub-question to indicate their relative importance or value. The question
then is whether the use of numerical grading can be avoided for these assessment types
or, if not, how these numbers should be related to the generic grade descriptors. The
following examples may be helpful to illustrate different approaches:
1.

Make a qualitative judgment on the overall work rather than the individual pieces
– in Ecology a traditional exam is set with a number of individual questions.
However, rather than awarding individual percentage points for each question
and then adding them together, a qualitative judgment is made against the
learning outcomes and criteria on the overall set of responses and an appropriate
alphabetic grade awarded.

2.

Structure the test to work through the grade descriptors – Biggs & Tang (2007)
suggest the possibility of setting a multiple question test which builds through the
levels of grade descriptors. So, for example, some data is provided and the first
group of questions ask for a factual or descriptive responses [grade D], the next
group of questions require some analysis and grouping of the data [grade band
C], the next questions asks for synthesis and evaluation of the data [grade B] and
the final question(s) ask the student to relate this evaluation to external themes
and make recommendations for policy and practice [grade band A]. Again, an
overall decision can be taken on the grade based on how well the student
Page 23 of 43

November 2025

performs at the different levels. A similar approach could be adopted by
combining multiple choice questions to identify knowledge in grade bands C & D
with more evaluative open questions which allow students to demonstrate
performance at grade bands B & A.
3.

Establish numerical equivalents to the alphabetic grades - it is important to note
that this should be done on a case-by-case basis and appropriate guidance to
students included in the module outline as there is no assumption in the generic
grade descriptors that they represent any particular numeric or percentage figure.
For example, there are cases where a professional body requires students to
achieve e.g. 70% on a factual examination. It is clear that this requirement for
factual knowledge only equates to our broad D grade descriptor. Therefore 70%
is set as equivalent to a pass for a piece of work, and the assessment operates
on a purely pass/fail basis.

4.

In the case of examinations or tests where assessment is based on a percentage
scale and the pass mark is deemed to be 40%, the University has introduced a
standardised methodology/conversion table. Departures from the standard may
be acceptable but must be specifically approved and must be communicated to
students in the module outline or equivalent.
% Mark awarded
79.5 – 100
74.5 – 79.49
69.5 – 74.49
66.5 – 69.49
63.5 – 66.49
59.5 – 63.49
56.5 – 59.49
53.5 – 56.49
49.5 – 53.49
46.5 – 49.49
43.5 – 46.49
39.5 – 43.49
34.5 – 39.49
20.0 – 34.49
0.01 – 19.99
0

Item grade
A+
A
AB+
B
BC+
C
CD+
D
DE
F
G
H

Where tests or examinations are deemed to require some element of numerical marking,
then the whole examination/test should be marked in percentage terms out of 100%,
and the conversion to grade should be made using the table above.
It will, however, be appropriate in many cases to mark an examination or an assessment
item with multiple parts in grades and then calculate an overall grade for the assessment
item to enter into the student record.
Determining an item grade from component parts
The following table can be used to calculate an overall grade for a multiple part
assessment, e.g. an examination paper with a small number of equally or differentially
Page 24 of 43

November 2025

weighted questions.
Item grade
A+
A
AB+
B
BC+
C
CD+
D
DE
F
G
H

Grade Points
19
18
17
16
15
14
13
12
11
10
9
8
7
5
2
0

Overall points
19 - 20
18 - 18.9
17 - 17.9
16 - 16.9
15 - 15.9
14 - 14.9
13 - 13.9
12 - 12.9
11 - 11.9
10 - 10.9
9 - 9.9
8 - 8.9
7 - 7.9
5 - 6.9
2 - 4.9
0

The individual assessment questions should have the grade points calculated, and then
the total for the assessment item should be rounded to one decimal point when
appropriate (e.g. a total of 5.55 becomes 5.6). A worked example is set out below.
The following example uses the table to determine the overall grade for an
examination paper made up of 4 equally weighted (25%) questions, for a student
who has achieved the following:
Qu 1 = C+
Qu 2 = BQu 3 = E
Q4 4 = B+
C+ for Qu 1 will be awarded 25% of 13 grade pts = 3.25
B- for Qu 2 will be awarded 25% of 14 grade pts = 3.5
E for Qu 3 will be awarded 25% of 7 grade pts = 1.75
B+ for Qu 4 will be awarded 25% of 16 grade pts = 4.0
The assessment total is (3.25 + 3.5 + 1.75 + 4.0) = 12.5
12.5 (as indicated in the right-hand column) equates to C for the examination
overall.

Page 25 of 43

November 2025

Appendix 4
Guidance on course closures, major changes and implications for student progression
Guidance
1

This guidance establishes principles for dealing with the situation where students
are required to re-take modules but the module is no longer running. It is
important that there are clear shared principles to ensure clarity, transparency
and equity. Students may be required to re-take modules because they have
failed two assessment opportunities, whether as a consequence of nonsubmission or academic failure in the relevant assessments.

2

Where a student is required through application of the TCRF regulations, to retake a module which is not running in the next academic year, the following
decisions are open to an examination board:
a. to determine that the student should follow a specified alternative equivalent
module (this should be the expected normal outcome)
b. to determine that the student should follow a personalised programme of
supported, directed study, based on the module learning outcomes and
leading to appropriate assessments
c. to offer the student the opportunity to transfer to a new or alternative
equivalent course, (particularly where the student may have failed a number
of modules)
d. to exceptionally offer the student one further final reassessment opportunity.

3

The Subject Assessment Board should make recommendations to the Board of
Examiners in relation to each module failed. This means that the Board of
Examiners can, if necessary, review the recommendation in the light of the full
profile of student results. In the event that decisions made by the Subject
Assessment and Examination Boards require amendment as a result of a late
decision not to run a specific module, a revised decision must be made via
Chair’s action, if necessary, involving the external examiner, and reported to the
next meeting of the Board(s).

4

The Chair and officers of the Board of Examiners should be mindful of issues of
transparency and equity (for students in relation to equality of opportunity and
cost) in reaching decisions.

5

The Academic Registrar should specifically report on this matter in the report to
ASQEC on examination board minutes.

Management of course closure/suspension/major change by Schools
6

College Learning, Teaching and Quality Enhancement Committees should review
at their first meeting in each academic year, any courses that have suspended
recruitment, are planned for closure or major review, and identify whether there
are implications for continuing students. Processes set out in the Course
Closure, Suspension and Significant Change Policy and Procedures should be
followed.

7

Where courses are undergoing major change, the approval process must explicitly
address transition arrangements for continuing students.
Page 26 of 43

November 2025

Appendix 5
Guide to Verification, Standardisation and Moderation
1

Verification

What is verification?
Verification is the process used to ensure that the form and content of assessment tasks
and briefs are appropriate, fair and valid in terms of reflecting the learning outcomes and
presenting an appropriate level of challenge to students.
When do I do verification?
Assignment tasks and briefs should be verified before being given to students.
How do I do verification?
The verification of briefs should consider the consistency of the assignment task in
relation to other modules at the same level in the same discipline, check that the
learning outcomes will be fully addressed by the task and that the assessment criteria
and grade descriptors reflect the learning outcomes and the level of the assessment.
Internally verified assessment items and related assessment criteria (together, where
appropriate, with assessment briefs) to include all examination papers must be provided
to the External Examiner for comment.
Course/subject teams must agree with External Examiners whether external scrutiny of
assessment items and assessment criteria (including marking schemes/grids or model
answers or similar) should take place before publication of assessment briefs to
students, or alternatively may be carried out as part of the process of external
moderation of student work.
Verification checklist
 All assessment tasks must be verified internally before being published to
students.
 Must be agreement with the External Examiner on what they wish to see before
publication to students – e.g. examination papers only, examination papers and
all L6 coursework assignment briefs, or other similar arrangement.
2

Standardisation

What is standardisation?
Standardisation is the process used to ensure that all members of the course or module
teaching team are familiar with, and have a common understanding of, the marking
standards and conventions in relation to the provision of feedback.
When do I do standardisation?
Whilst this list is not definitive, instances where standardisation might be recommended
include: the introduction of new or revised assessment items, multiple markers for an
assessment, a number of new or sessional markers, and the involvement of partner
institutions or multiple delivery sites.

Page 27 of 43

November 2025

How do I do standardisation?
Standardisation is completed in advance of marking and involves a group of assessors
all independently marking a sample of student work and assigning grades using agreed
criteria.
Following individual grading, the team meets, discusses and agrees a grade, which
serves as a benchmark for the module run. The meeting should also confirm and clarify
other issues concerning marking and feedback, for example penalties for omitting key
items. Arrangements for moderation and method and quality of feedback should also be
discussed so that it is as consistent as possible.
Where the same assessment item has been used before, previously submitted work can
be used for the standardisation activity. Where the assessment item is new, a sample
from submitted work can be used. In this instance, the meeting will need to be arranged
to take place shortly after submission. If possible, a range of quality of work should be
used, with particular attention being paid to the boundary between a pass and a fail
grade.
All members of the module marking team must be involved in the standardisation
activity. Where members cannot attend a meeting, alternative means of communicating
should be used. At the minimum, all members should grade the piece(s) of work and be
informed of the result of the exercise prior to grading submitted work.
Where the assessment does not involve written work (e.g. presentations, OSCEs), film
of previous assessment should be used. Where this is not available, other methods to
ensure consistency of approach should be used.
Standardisation checklist
 Standardisation exercises must take place on an annual basis where modules are
delivered across different sites and for large teaching teams
 Where there are new and/or multiple markers for a defined assessment, a
standardisation exercise must be undertaken before marking begins to ensure
consistency between markers
 A standardisation exercise must be undertaken for all items of summative
assessment.
 The date of the standardisation exercise must be documented on the Internal
Moderation Report Template and returned to the School’s Quality Administrator.
 External Examiners must be informed of the outcome of the standardisation
exercise, and the pieces of work must be made available to them.
3

Double Marking

Double marking is the process by which a piece of work is marked by two assessors,
who agree a final grade.
What is blind double marking?
Blind double marking is when two separate assessors each independently assess a
piece of student work, assigning a grade and providing comments to justify the grades in
Page 28 of 43

November 2025

relation to the learning outcomes and assessment criteria. Both examiners record their
grades and comments separately, and then compare grades and resolve differences to
produce an agreed grade and feedback.
When do I do blind double marking?
Blind double marking is normally carried out as a universal exercise, that is, every piece
of student work is considered by two assessors. The University requires all Independent
Studies/Projects and Dissertations of 30 credits or more to be blind double marked.
What is non-blind double marking?
Non-blind double marking is when an assessor grades a piece of student work,
assigning a grade and providing comments to justify the grade, and then a second
assessor also assigns a grade and provides comments, having seen the grades and
comments of the first assessor. An agreed grade and feedback is provided for the
student.
When do I do non-blind double marking?
Non-blind double marking is normally carried out as a universal exercise. Non-blind
double marking should be used to confirm the pass/fail boundary, and may be
appropriate in the case of new staff members, or in relation to new partners, or new and
innovative assignments, or where as a result of initial moderation, a re-mark of the whole
set of assignments is required.
Double Marking checklist
 Specific arrangements to double mark assessments, first marked by new
inexperienced staff, must be in place
 All independent studies, projects and dissertations weighted 30 credits or more
must be blind double marked
 All assessments falling into the pass/fail boundary (all grade E and a sample of
grade D-) must be non-blind double marked
 Fails must be sampled through non-blind marking
4

Moderation

Moderation is the process to assure assessment criteria have been applied consistently
and that assessment outcomes are fair and reliable. There are two kinds of moderation:
4.1

Internal moderation

What is internal moderation?
Internal moderation is undertaken by UW staff to demonstrate that the grades awarded
are reliable and consistent. The purpose of internal moderation to ensure that academic
standards are appropriate and consistent across course/subject teams and that
feedback reflects agreed assessment policies and assessment criteria, and therefore the
assessment outcomes for students are fair and reliable.
How do I do internal moderation?
A UW assessor marks the set of student assignments, providing a grade and comments
to justify the grade, and a second UW assessor (the moderator) then reviews a sample
of marked assignments (normally through blind or non-blind double marking) from
Page 29 of 43

November 2025

across the grade profile. The moderator’s role is to confirm (or not) the grades awarded
by the first marker, and the quality of the feedback, in the light of course/University
protocols and expectations. An internal Moderation Report must be complied for each
module run and sent to the External Examiner
Moderation is normally undertaken using double marking of a sample of assessments in
accordance with the University Assessment Policy; other methods of moderation are
detailed in the Policy.
Allocation of moderators can be undertaken in a variety of ways;
•
Allocation in pairs, where markers moderate each other’s work
•
Allocation where each marker has an identified moderator
•
Random allocation where a moderator is assigned or self-assigned.
Moderation can occur electronically between identified pairs or at a single event where
team members meet and moderate together.
Where a module is run as part of collaborative provision, it must include representation
from all relevant partners.
When do I do internal moderation?
Internal moderation is normally carried out on a sample basis, to corroborate the
accuracy of the marking standards and quality of feedback applied by the first marker. It
is the most usual form of moderation activity and should be used for all assessments
where other forms of moderation do not apply. Internal moderation should be completed
within the 20 working days assessment feedback period and before provisional grades
are made available to the students. All summative assessments should be subject to
internal and external moderation.
What do I do if the first and second grades are different?
Differences between markers should be resolved by discussion and agreement in the
first instance. This should involve the module leader and should consider the
implications for the whole cohort. In general, grades should not be changed for work in
the sample only. Where agreement cannot be reached, the assessment should be third
marked, usually by the module leader.
The module leader should review the moderation process as recorded on the form,
assessing the levels of disagreement between markers, the agreed grades and the
discussions to date. Where levels of disagreement are consistently above one whole
grade band, they can consider a range of further measures including:
•
•
•

No further action
Additional use of blind or non-blind moderation for assessments marked by a
specified marker where there is more than one marker
Remarking of assessments for the whole cohort.

Justification for decisions should be reported on the internal Moderation Report.

Page 30 of 43

November 2025

4.2

External moderation

What is external moderation?
External moderation is undertaken by experienced academic peers (External
Examiners), independent of the University, to ensure that the level of achievement of
students reflects.
How do I do external moderation?
A minimum sample of 15% of the work for each item of assessment for individual
modules must be made available to the External Examiner(s), as described in section
11.15 of the Assessment Policy. External Examiners are not expected to arbitrate in the
event of disagreement between first and second markers, and are not expected to
change grades for individual items of student work.
When do I do external moderation?
External moderation can take place after the 20 working days assessment feedback
period and after provisional grades are made available to the students. Assessment
relating to level 4 modules in three-year degree courses is not normally subject to
external moderation after the first year of delivery. External moderation is not usually
necessary for work marked in the reassessment period, since external moderation
should have confirmed marking standards for first sit students work.
Moderation checklist
 A formal published statement of standardisation and moderation procedures
should be included as an annexe to the Student Course Handbook. The
statement must specify how differences between markers are to be resolved
 Where a course is taught across different sites or through different partnerships,
the course management team must specify in the formal statement the
moderation arrangements across the sites or partnerships
 Minimum requirements apply to the internal moderation of all summative student
assessments, as described in section 11.7 of the Assessment Policy
 Where a course or module is delivered at more than one site, the External
Examiner should be provided with the provisional statistical profile of grades for
each site of delivery, so that they are able to comment on the marking and
student achievement standards for each delivery site.
 The Internal Moderation Report must be completed and sent to the External
Examiner

Page 31 of 43

November 2025

Process of standardisation and moderation
If the same assessment task, learning outcomes, and criteria, previous work could be
used and standardisation exercise can be completed in advance of submission date

Completed within 20 working days, before results are
released to students

Student submits piece of summative work for assessment

Module team undertake standardisation exercise before
marking begins and form is completed

Individual assessors complete their allocated marking

Second marking is undertaken

Variation in grade(s)

Grades are agreed

Third marking is undertaken
by Module Leader

Internal Moderation Report is completed and made available to
External Examiner

Page 32 of 43

Can be completed after 20
working days, after results
are released to students

Anything noteworthy for future development is raised with
School Quality Coordinator and College Director/LTQE

November 2025

Appendix 6
Proforma for internal standardisation and moderation of marking
Assessment Moderation Report
(please see UW Assessment Policy for
definitions and details of moderation)
Confidential: for UW staff and external examiner(s) only
Module Code:
Module Title:
Module
Leader:
Academic
Year:
Assessment
No/Title:
Date of
submission:

Semester:
Assessment choice
(if applicable):

Marking and Moderation team
Name

Date of Standardisation
(if applicable):
Nature of Standardisation
(Guidance – Please Delete) Describe
how any standardisation activity was
undertaken – see guidance in
Appendix 5 of University Assessment
Policy

S1 / S2 / AS

Initials

Date of Moderation:
Describe how moderation was
undertaken
(Guidance – Please Delete) Typically
internal moderation or double marking
(blind or non-blind) - see Appendix 5 of
University Assessment Policy

Page 33 of 43

November 2025

Comments from module leader
Please comment on any issues that the internal moderator should be aware of for
this assignment, if necessary.
(Guidance – Please Delete) Please comment on any issues that the internal
moderator should be aware of for this assignment, including for example number
of AI cases.

Page 34 of 43

November 2025

Statistical Analysis from first marking
Module Cohort
Number of assignments
Size:
marked:
A

B

Number to be
Moderated:

Breakdown of marks for all submissions (% if 20+ submissions)
C
D
E
F
G

H

NS

Individual student outcomes from sample (add more rows if necessary)
External examiners must be able to match actual student work to the information below and you should therefore normally use
the student number (as that is present on the work) unless it has not been marked anonymously. If you have a large sample, you
may consider using other means of matching work with grades. In such cases, please discuss with your external examiner(s) and
feel free to amend/adapt this element of the form.
Student number, name
or other identifier (e.g.,
Turnitin submission
number)

Assignmen
t choice if
applicable

Marker
Initials

Marker
Grade
(initial)

Moderato
r
Grade
(initial)

Moderator comment if mark not agreed

Page 35 of 43

August 2024

Agreement of grades
Please indicate any significant discussions and/or actions taken to agree final
marks.
(Note that it is not appropriate to adjust the grades of submissions in the sample,
without reviewing the grades awarded to all submissions.)

Comments from Moderator
Moderators are expected to use the space below to provide commentary that
marking and internal moderation has taken place in accordance with University
Assessment Policy.
(Note that comments from Moderator are expected regardless of agreement of
marks.)
Are marking standards
Please comment on the validity of grades assigned by
appropriate?
initial marking to the sample of submissions

Is the quality of feedback
consistent with course
team agreed approach?

Please comment on the quality of feedback given to
the sample of submissions

Is the marker
commenting
appropriately on the use
of English language by
the student?
Comments for the
module leader and/or
course leader to
consider for future
practice

Please comment on proficiency in English language
demonstrated in the student work, and marker
comment on this

Recommendations for enhancing practice and/or
student outcomes

To be completed by internal moderator.
Internal moderator
Date sample received
Date moderation
completed

Page 36 of 43

I confirm that moderation has taken place in accordance with University policy
and that the final grades have been agreed following the discussions and
actions specified above.
Module Leader
Date

This form should be provided to the External Examiner as confirmation of
completion of the moderation process.
Comments from External Examiner
Generally, External Examiners are expected to comment by exception and to
provide overall comments in the Annual Report. Space is provided below if
External Examiners wish to provide comment on individual modules and samples
of students’ assessed work and outcomes
Is the marking accurate
Please comment on the validity of grades assigned by
and fair, aligned with the to the sample of submissions
grading criteria?

Is feedback clear? Does
feedback identify key
strengths and areas for
improvement?

Please comment on the quality of feedback given to
the sample of submissions

Has internal moderation
taken place effectively?

Please comment on the process and recording of
internal moderation

Comments for the
module leader and/or
course leader to
consider for future
practice

Recommendations for enhancing practice and/or
student outcomes

External Examiner
Date
Please return completed report to the module leader. Where External Examiner
comments have been provided, the module leader and/or course leader should
provide a written response to these.

Page 37 of 43

Appendix 7
Providing feedback on student formative and summative assessments:
guidance for establishing a course team approach
A course team approach to assessment and feedback for learning
1

The University Assessment Policy is based on a number of core principles
that make clear:
•
•
•
•

assessment is an integral part of the curriculum design process
assessment and feedback are inclusive and dialogic in nature to develop
students’ learning
understanding academic requirements, judgements, standards and
processes is established through the development of assessment
literacy
formative and summative assessment strategies are planned, so that
feedback and related learning processes provide opportunities for
students to prepare for summative assessment items.

2

The application of these principles means course teams should have an
agreed, consistent and planned approach to providing feedback to students
which includes developing assessment literacy, ie understanding the process
of making academic judgements.

3

This guidance sets out suggested lines of action for course teams to consider
in formulating a position on the provision of feedback on assignment drafts
and plans as part of a broader course assessment for learning strategy.
Suggestions are also made for a consistent approach to feedback on
summative assignments. The course team’s approach to formative
assessment, feedback on plans and drafts and on summative assessments
should be clear for, and made available to, students via Blackboard or similar.
The key principle as stated above should be about the development of student
learning.

4

Learning activities to develop understanding of academic standards are an
important element of student development, especially in the early stages of a
course. It is a matter of University policy (Assessment Policy section 7.4)
that all Level 4 students should have the opportunity for an early (within the
first 4/6 weeks) formative assessment linked to a mandatory module. This
may have a clear diagnostic purpose, for example in identifying any gaps or
weaknesses in academic writing style and referencing etc. This should
preferably be submitted through Turnitin® and students should be invited to
discuss the similarity report with their Personal Academic Tutor (PAT).

5

Learning activities that also facilitate the development of assessment literacy
such as applying assessment criteria to anonymised examples of completed
assessments from the previous year, to support understanding of grading can
be helpful. Formative learning activities that underpin summative
assessments, (eg constructing a visual summary of line of argument for a
summative essay or discussing the merits of different lines of argument) can
Page 38 of 43

also help students to structure the process of tackling an assignment in
manageable ways.
6

It is likely that a course team already has a position on drafts/plans for major
assessment items such as projects and dissertations and other specialist
assignments, in order to ensure equity for students. Consideration should be
given to the full range of assignments used in the course and its constituent
modules, with students being given structured opportunities to receive
formative feedback. This may include providing comment on plans or drafts
and ensuring appropriate consistency of approach across the course team.
Course teams should consider how approaches to providing formative
feedback might be structured over the early and later stages of the course. For
example, in the early stages directed learning tasks can be linked to
summative assessments and a class session may focus on peer review of
work with the tutor pulling together key learning points.

7

It is anticipated that the course team’s approach, with details relating to how
formative assessment and feedback and other learning opportunities,
including where appropriate commentary on drafts or plans, will be set out in
the Course Handbook and/or on Blackboard and in module outlines. This
should include reference to how students are expected to act on the feedback.
It is important to provide a clear rationale for students about the approach
taken by the course team, so that students understand the reasons for
different approaches, eg between levels, or between different modules or
subjects.

Considerations for formulating a course team position on developing
assessment literacy and commenting on formative assessment (eg drafts and
plans)
8

Be clear about what will be commented upon, with what purpose in mind and
within what timescale – for example:
•
•

•
•
•
•
•

will it be acceptable for a student to seek feedback on a plan or a draft
(not both)?
it may be helpful to establish for students the purpose of a ‘draft’ or a
‘plan’; will it be to check the planned structure, referencing, written style
etc, or the overall quality of the proposed line of argument in terms of the
assessment criteria for the assignment? Or something else?
will there be agreed parameters regarding the length and format of plans
and drafts, and also on the volume and style of feedback; will it, for
example, directly address the student – eg ‘you should …’?
how will students get feedback on drafts/plans; will it be written or given
in person, or is this a matter of staff preference or student choice?
should there be different approaches formative assessment and
feedback at different levels of the course, (or in different modules)
eg plans at Level 4 and draft introduction and conclusion at Level 6?
will work submitted in the week before the assignment deadline be
commented upon?
will feedback encompass broader student development and challenge in
addition to specific assessment task feedback?
Page 39 of 43

9

Generally, it is not appropriate, when commenting on work in progress or
plans, for staff to predict or give information about a likely grade, or to
comment on full drafts or multiple versions. The course team may consider
limiting the volume or nature of feedback and/or asking students (particularly
in the later stages of a course) to specify what they would like feedback on.

10

Teams should be mindful of the dialogic nature of feedback so that students
can develop assessment literacy and become confident in self-regulating and
self-assessing the quality of their work. PATs may have a key role in this, as
may activities designed to develop assessment literacy.

Suggested framework for a consistent approach to provision of feedback
on student summative assessments
11

A consistent approach to feedback on summative assessments (and
indeed on many forms of formative assessment) is considered by
students and by external examiners to be good practice. More
fundamentally it is central to student perceptions of ‘fairness’ and equity.
Establishing a feedback framework will help produce appropriate
consistency; it could be developed and agreed at course, subject,
departmental or even School level, and should be shared with external
examiners.
1.
2.
3.
4.

The purpose of feedback is to engage and motivate students in the
learning process, to support reflection and self-assessment, and to
clarify expected standards.
Feedback should have an explicit relationship to learning outcomes/
assessment criteria.
Focused (not copious) annotations with a balance of generic and
personally directed comments should normally be provided on the
text of an assignment.
Summative comments should be structured in terms of an agreed
maximum of 2/3 positive and 2/3 developmental comments – for
example:
• 2/3 strengths/things done well and why
• 2/3 weaknesses/things for improvement and why
• 2/3 targets for development in future assignments.

5.

The moderation process should assure the quality of feedback
provided within any agreed framework.

Page 40 of 43

APPENDIX 8
Guidance on Proofreading
Overview
The skill of proofreading is an important part of the writing process. Students are
expected to take responsibility for proofreading assignments prior to submission.
However, the University recognises that students may wish to ask a third party to
proofread work; this might be a family member, friend, or colleague. It is the student’s
responsibility to ensure that third-party proofreaders are aware of this guidance.
Proofreading usually involves checking work for grammar, spelling, punctuation,
syntax, and formatting. This guidance sets out what the University considers
appropriate in terms of proofreading and advises how to guard against unintentional
academic misconduct
(Further information on Academic Misconduct can be found here
https://www2.worc.ac.uk/registryservices/681.htm)
Key principles
1.

Students are authors of their work and responsible for proofreading completed
assessments.

2.

Students are responsible for accessing support with proofreading where
necessary.

3.

The University supports students in developing academic writing skills and
proficient use of spelling, punctuation, and grammar. Support is available from
the Centre for Academic English and Skills.

4.

The University does not permit the use of professional third-party services
(unless agreed as part of a reasonable adjustment). This may result in an
academic misconduct investigation.

Please note that the Library Services, the Centre of Academic English, and the
Writers in Residence do not offer proofreading as a service.
Definition
Proofreading – the careful checking of text for errors prior to submission; specifically,
those related to grammar, punctuation, and syntax.
Editing – the process of amending, changing, or adapting text which substantially
changes the academic content of the work.
Peer review – working with peers to discuss and evaluate ideas, offer opinions, and
gain feedback.

Page 41 of 43

Process
A proofreader may:
•
•
•
•
•
•

identify spelling and typographical errors.
identify errors in punctuation.
identify poor grammar and sentence structure.
highlight vocabulary errors
highlight unclear syntax/sections of text which appear ambiguous to the reader.
indicate inconsistencies in the layout of the document; for example, use of
headings; referencing conventions, etc.

A proofreader should not:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

author an essay or any other type of a written assignment for a student.
edit, change, rearrange or rewrite paragraphs.
provide additional content.
Make suggestions about what to add or leave out of the work.
correct mistakes where the original intended meaning is not clear.
carry out any translations.
correct factual errors, calculations, formulae.
alter diagrams, charts, or figures.

Academic Integrity
In submitting assignments to the University, students are confirming that they are the
author of the submission and have been responsible for editing and proofreading
which considers this guidance. If a tutor suspects that the work presented is not the
student’s own work, it may be referred to an Academic Integrity Tutor for
investigation as set out in the Academic Integrity policy.
FAQs
Can I use tools such as Grammarly?
There are a number of suggested writing tools to support academic writing which can
be found on the Study Skills Portal.
I am a student with a registered disability (including a specific learning
difference such as dyslexia), does this guidance apply to me?
Yes. Students who received Disabled Students' allowance (DSA) funded 1:1 study
skills support can use this support to develop their proofreading skills, but they
cannot ask their study skills tutor to proofread their work for them.
I am an international student, does this guidance apply to me?
Yes. For further information contact the Centre for Academic English and Skills.

Page 42 of 43

Can I use a third-party to write my assignment?
No, the use of third parties, including generative artificial intelligence sites to write
assignments is not permitted and may lead to an academic misconduct investigation.
Can my supervisor proofread my dissertation?
It is your responsibility to proofread any work before submission. Your supervisor
may signpost you to tools that will support proofreading and editing if appropriate but
will not routinely correct your spelling, punctuation, or grammar.
How do I proofread my work?
There are a number of ways to proofread your work:
•
•
•
•
•

Read your work aloud.
Look for one type of error at a time; for example, spelling, missing words, use of
synonyms.
Check for common errors identified in previous work.
Take a break from your work and revisit a few hours/days later.
Use the Immersive Reader function on Microsoft word to help develop your
proofreading skills. There are some useful YouTube videos to support this.

Page 43 of 43
