Code of Practice for
Assessment and Academicrelated Matters 2026-27
Academic misconduct policy
Policy introduction
27.1.1

The University is committed to developing a culture of academic integrity and to conducting fair and
equitable assessment for all students. Academic integrity reflects the core values of honesty, trust, fairness,
respect, and responsibility in all academic endeavours.

27.1.2

Academic misconduct occurs where a student gains, or attempts to gain, an unfair academic advantage.

27.1.3

This policy:
•

Defines academic misconduct.

•

Explains student responsibilities.

•

Sets out how concerns are investigated.

•

Explains how decisions are made.

27.1.4

The University recognises that misconduct may be intentional or unintentional, and responses will be
educational where appropriate and in line with institutional policy.

27.1.5

International students may face unique challenges in understanding academic integrity expectations due to
differing cultural norms or academic practices. The University supports international students in
understanding and adhering to these standards. Engaging with available services and resources proactively
is essential to avoid unintentional breaches. Refer to the Study Skills section of the Student Hub online
portal for more information.

Scope
27.2.1

This policy applies to students as set out in section 1. There is a separate Research Misconduct Policy and
procedures for staff and the research components undertaken by postgraduate research students.

27.2.2

The procedure to be followed in relation to programmes delivered by a validated partner organisation
(validated provision) is set out in section 27.17 and programme documentation provided by the validated
partner.

27.2.3

Where relevant, other university policies and procedures (such as those relating to discipline, fitness to
practise or research misconduct) may be used as well as or instead of this policy and procedure.

Principles
27.3.1

All academic misconduct cases will be handled in accordance with principles consistent with guidance from
the Office of the Independent Adjudicator for Higher Education:
•

Fairness: students have opportunity to respond.

•

Proportionality: responses reflect seriousness and intent.

•

Consistency: similar cases receive similar outcomes.

•

Timeliness: cases progress without unnecessary delay.

•

Educational focus: early breaches are addressed developmentally where appropriate and in line with
institutional policy.

•

Independence of decision-making at escalation stages.

•

Decisions are made on the balance of probabilities (whether misconduct is more likely than not to
have occurred).

What constitutes academic misconduct?
27.4.1

Academic misconduct may take several forms. The following is not an exhaustive list, but academic
misconduct includes:
Type

Description

Plagiarism
(including misuse
of generative AI)

This happens where a student incorporates the work of others (published or
unpublished) in their own work without properly acknowledging it. Students are
effectively claiming ownership for work that is not their own. This includes wordfor-word borrowing as well as copying with minor changes. It also includes the
use of artificial intelligence (AI) which is not properly acknowledged, including
the use of AI in the creation of reference lists. ‘Work’ is not limited to text, but
also includes statistics, assembled facts or arguments, figures, photographs,
pictures, or diagrams. Students must follow the correct referencing guidelines
provided by their programme.

Self-plagiarism

For example, a student using the same work for a new assessment that was
submitted for a previous summative assessment. This includes resubmitting
previous work when a student is repeating study. It also applies to work
submitted during previous study elsewhere.
Students may use their previously submitted work for their own learning and
reference, in the same way they would use third-party information, but they may
not rework and/or resubmit their previous work for assessment when repeating a
module. This would be considered as self-plagiarism and will be regarded with
the same severity as plagiarism in general in submitted work.

Using an essaywriting service

Buying or otherwise obtaining work which a student then submits for an
assessment. Commissioning an essay is fraud and the most severe sanction,
enforced withdrawal of enrolment due to programme failure, may apply. It should
be noted that the Skills and Post-16 Education Act 2022 has made essay mills in
the UK illegal.

Fraudulent or
fabricated
coursework
(including misuse
of generative AI)

For example: reports of practical work that are untrue and/or made up/generated
by AI, this includes using AI to generate reference lists; fabrication of research or
dishonest interpretation of data; unethical research practice including failure to
obtain the correct ethical approval.

Cheating in
examinations

For example: through impersonation; taking into the examination unauthorised
materials, mobile phones, or other electronic devices; copying from other
students or from notes; not obeying examination regulations.

Collusion
(including misuse
of generative AI)

Submitting work produced jointly with another student (except where the terms
of the assessment require collaboration). Any intentional or unintentional act of
working with other students to produce work that is falsely represented as
individual. This includes unauthorised collaboration, sharing answers, or helping
others cheat.

Deception

For example, forging a signature relating to a placement or other academic
material.

Misuse of
translation tools

Inappropriate use of online translation tools to conceal the source of text, or
otherwise present work that it not a student’s own.

Unintentional acts

Unintentional acts of academic misconduct occur when students fail to follow
academic integrity guidelines due to a lack of understanding, rather than
deliberate intent. Examples can include: incorrect citation or paraphrasing;
accidental sharing of drafts with students who submit similar work;
misunderstanding about what constitutes permissible collaboration.

Poor scholarship
27.5.1

Poor scholarship is not academic misconduct. It refers to mistakes arising from a lack of academic skill or
understanding. Examples may include:
•

Incorrect or inconsistent referencing.

•

Weak or incomplete paraphrasing.

•

Inappropriate or missing citation of sources where the student has attempted to acknowledge the
source.

•

Over reliance on quotation due to limited paraphrasing skills.

•

A genuine lack of academic skills writing or study skills.

Such issues are normally addressed through marking, formative feedback, and academic skills support that than
through academic misconduct procedures.
27.5.2

However, unintentional acts may still constitute academic misconduct where they result in a significant
misrepresentation of authorship, sources, evidence, or academic practice. Academic misconduct may
therefore arise even where there was no deliberate intention to deceive.

27.5.3

In determining whether a matter should be treated as poor scholarship or academic misconduct, the
University will consider factors including:
•

the nature, extent, and seriousness of the issue;

•

whether sources, evidence, or authorship have been materially misrepresented;

•

whether the sources cited genuinely support the claims attributed to them;

•

whether the issue is isolated or forms part of a wider pattern within the work;

•

the student’s level of study and previous opportunities to develop academic practice;

•

whether the student has attempted to acknowledge sources appropriately;

•

and whether the concerns are more consistent with a lack of academic skill or with careless,
reckless, or deceptive academic practice.

27.5.4

A disagreement in interpretation, synthesis, emphasis, or critical analysis will not normally, on its own,
constitute academic misconduct. However, the invention, falsification, substantial misrepresentation, or
repeated misuse of sources or citations may constitute academic misconduct, including where arising
through careless or inappropriate use of Generative AI tools.

27.5.5

Expectations regarding academic practice increase as students progress through their programme. While
some instances of poor scholarship may arise in earlier stages of study as students develop academic skills,
it would not normally be expected at higher levels of study (e.g., Level 6 and above). At these levels,
students are expected to demonstrate secure academic practice, including accurate referencing and
appropriate paraphrasing. Repeated or significant failures to acknowledge sources at these levels may
therefore indicate potential academic misconduct rather than poor scholarship.

27.5.6

For more information refer to our webpage.

Roles and responsibilities
Student responsibilities
27.6.1

Students are responsible for understanding and applying proper scholarly practices to avoid unintentional
breaches.

27.6.2

It is the student’s responsibility to develop good academic practice by taking part in sessions provided for
students by tutors, and by study skills teams such as librarians, study development tutors and the London
Learning and Wellness team. Good academic practice involves students improving their note-making and
writing skills, being motivated to direct their own studies, seeking advice if in doubt, engaging with and
adhering to the University’s guidelines on Artificial Intelligence and any associated development and
acknowledging the sources used by referencing correctly. Some examples of the support the University
provides include:
•

Access to study support sessions which may be about developing a student’s writing skills, correct
referencing style for their discipline.

•

Access to online resources by visiting the University’s Study Skills page.

•

Access to Turnitin so that the student can test their work.

27.6.3

Students are encouraged to show the results of their reading by referring to, quoting from or paraphrasing
works on their subject, but they must make it clear which work is theirs and which has come from elsewhere,
through the use of appropriate referencing as well as in-text citations or footnotes/endnotes.

27.6.4

When a student submits assessed work, the student will be asked to confirm it is their own.

27.6.5

Translation tools are acceptable to use and do not require citation if they only influence the form but not the
content of an assessment or other output. They should not be used as a substitute for the application of
required thinking and communication skills.

University responsibilities
27.6.6

Key roles and responsibilities related to academic misconduct are set out below:
Area

Responsibilities

Academic
team

•

Academic teams exercise academic judgement.

•

Academic teams are responsible for:
➢ Identifying concerns.
➢ Conducting investigations.
➢ Holding School Inquiry meetings.
➢ Determining findings at School level.
➢ Referring cases to ACC.

Academic
Integrity Lead
(AIL)

•

Each School has one or more appointed Academic Integrity Lead.

•

The AIL does not decide cases involving their own students.

•

The AIL:
➢ Promotes academic integrity.
➢ Advises colleagues on policy application.
➢ Supports interpretation of generative AI misuse.
➢ Quality-assures School decisions.
➢ Ensures consistency across cases.
➢ Records requests for oral exams.
➢ Sits as a standing academic member of ACC reviewing academic
misconduct cases.

Programme
Administration
and Support
Service
(PASS)

•

PASS does not make decisions.

•

PASS supports Schools administratively by:
➢ Arranging meetings.
➢ Issuing correspondence, including issuing outcomes.
➢ Managing documentation.
➢ Advising on procedural requirements.
➢ Maintaining School-stage records.
➢ Referring cases with the necessary paperwork to ACC

Appeals and
Conduct
Committee
(ACC)

•

The Head of Governance and Compliance is Chair of the ACC

•

ACC provides independent institutional oversight and:
➢ Determines cases.
➢ Confirms findings and sanctions.
➢ Hears challenges to decisions.
➢ Ensures institutional consistency.
➢ Do not consider cases within their programme area.

Student
Casework
team

•

The Student Casework team becomes involved once a case is referred to ACC.

•

The team:
➢ Administers ACC panels and hearings.
➢ Ensures procedural compliance.
➢ Issues outcome letters.
➢ Manages appeals and Completion of Procedures letters.
➢ Notifies Registry of ACC outcomes.

Area

Responsibilities

Registry
(Assessment
team)

•

The team:
➢ Applies sanctions within the student records system.
➢ Updates the student records system as appropriate and in accordance
with award and progression rules.

Overview of the academic misconduct process
27.7.1

27.7.2

Academic misconduct cases progress through four stages:
•

Stage 1: Investigation

•

Stage 2: School Inquiry and consideration

•

Stage 3: Appeals and Conduct Committee (ACC)

•

Stage 4: Full hearing of the Appeals and Conduct Committee

It is the University’s responsibility to establish that academic misconduct is more likely than not to have
taken place. In determining this judgement, the following is considered: the consistency and credibility of
evidence with the reported breach; the plausibility of alternative explanations; patterns of behaviour, such as
similarities in submissions.

Stage 1: Investigation
Investigating academic
misconduct in

Action

Examinations

•

If a student is suspected of cheating in an examination, the invigilator
will make a note on the student’s examination script and remove any
suspect objects.

•

The student will be allowed to finish the examination.

•

At the end of the examination, the student will be told that an
investigation will take place. The matter will be reported to the
student’s Module Director/Lead and an investigation will take place.

•

If the evidence indicates that the student has committed academic
misconduct, the case will be forwarded to Stage 2: School Inquiry
and consideration.

•

The matter will be reported to the Module Director/Lead and/or
Programme/Course Lead and an investigation will take place.

•

If the evidence indicates that the student has committed academic
misconduct, the case will be forwarded to Stage 2: School Inquiry
and consideration.

Assessments

27.8.1

The person who is investigating the report will determine the best way of doing this. This may include the
use of plagiarism detection software.

27.8.2

The student may be required to attend an oral examination to allow the student an opportunity to
demonstrate that the work is indeed theirs. This only takes place where it is necessary for the investigation.
The purpose of the oral examination is to establish whether the student is likely to be the author of the work
submitted. The School will seek the approval the AIL or nominee to hold this oral examination before
doing so. The AIL is required to record requests for oral exams. Language modules do not need individual
approval from the AIL due to the nature of the type of module/assessment, an oral exam can be held for
these modules without notifying or requesting approval from the AIL.

27.8.3

Once approval has been given by the AIL, the student will be invited to attend an oral examination. Students
will be given at least 3 working days’ notice of the meeting taking place. At least two members of
academic staff will assess whether the student’s responses indicate authorship of the work. This will involve
asking the student about specific details of their assessment. If a student does not participate in the oral
examination, negative inferences may be made regarding their authorship of the work.

27.8.4

The student may choose to be accompanied by a supporter at the oral examination as defined in section
2.1.11. They cannot ask questions, interpret the student’s responses, or speak on the student’s behalf. If the
student’s supporter behaves inappropriately at any stage during the meeting, they will be asked to withdraw
their involvement.

27.8.5

If professionals are holding both the oral examination and the School Inquiry meeting on the same day, they
must ensure students are notified of this intention and are given the appropriate information in relation to
both meetings. There must be a short break between the oral examination and the School Inquiry meeting, if
both are held on the same day.

Stage 2: School inquiry and consideration
27.9.1

Stage 2 is supported administratively by PASS.

27.9.2

Once the investigation described above is complete, and normally within 10 working days of the concern
first arising, the student will receive a copy of all the evidence and the academic misconduct referral form
which details why the evidence provided leads to a suspicion of academic misconduct. The student will be
invited to a meeting at the School. Students should normally be given at least 3 working days’ notice to
attend.

27.9.3

This meeting is different to the oral examination described in section 27.8.4, as the purpose is to allow the
student the chance to comment on the evidence and respond to the report of academic misconduct made
against them. As an alternative to the meeting, the School may share the concerns with the student and
invite comments from the student through an email exchange or ask the student to provide a written
statement.

27.9.4

The student may be asked to provide their notes, drafts and any other records relating to their preparatory
work for the assessment. Any failure to provide this material is likely to be considered when a decision is
made about potential academic misconduct.

27.9.5

The meeting will be chaired by an AIL with one other member of staff present with appropriate
knowledge and expertise who had no prior involvement . The member of staff involved in the initial
investigation, will also be in attendance to present their case. For franchise partners, at least two members
from York St John University should be present alongside an academic member of staff from the partnership
and an AIL.

27.9.6

The student may choose to be accompanied by a supporter at the meeting as defined in section 2.1.11.

27.9.7

Audio or video recordings of the meeting must not be made by the student or any accompanying person. AI
notetaking software must not be used during the meeting by the student or any accompanying person.

27.9.8

At this meeting, the School will decide from the following outcomes:
Action

Description

No case to
answer

•

There is insufficient evidence to justify a finding of academic misconduct.

•

If so, no further action will be taken under these procedures or poor scholarship.

Poor
scholarship

•

The matter should be considered poor scholarship rather than academic
misconduct.

•

No further action will take place under these procedures, although the poor
scholarship will be considered through the normal marking process which should
resume following completion of the investigation.

•

The finding will be noted on the student’s record and may be considered in the
context of any future reports that the student has committed academic
misconduct.

•

There is a case to be answered that academic misconduct has indeed taken
place.

•

The student will be informed of this decision, and all the evidence will be
forwarded to the Appeals and Conduct Committee, along with a School
recommendation about the sanction.

Academic
misconduct

27.9.9

The student will be notified in writing of the outcome of the School Inquiry within 5 working days. Whichever
decision is made, the student may be referred to appropriate support and guidance to develop their
academic skills. This may include, for example, a referral to the relevant Academic Liaison Librarian, Study
Development team or London Learning and Wellness team. If the student fails to take up the support
offered, this will be considered negatively should any further report of academic misconduct be made.

Stage 3: Appeals and Conduct Committee (ACC)
27.10.1 Cases referred to ACC are administered by the Student Casework team.
27.10.2 The Academic Board has delegated to the Appeals and Conduct Committee the power to make decisions in
cases of reported academic misconduct.
27.10.3 ACC panels normally include:
•

Trained ACC members.

•

Academic Integrity Lead representation.

•

Independent Chair.

27.10.4 At least two members of the ACC will review cases.

ACC panel considerations
27.11.1 The Panel will consider:
a) Whether the evidence is sufficient to justify the conclusion that the student has committed academic
misconduct.
b) What sanction is appropriate considering all the evidence.
27.11.2 The student will not be present at this panel meeting, and no representative from the student’s school will
attend. The Panel may:
•

Uphold the case.

•

Dismiss the case on the basis that the evidence does not justify a finding of academic misconduct.

•

Request further investigation or evidence from the School.

27.11.3 Where the Panel upholds the case, the Panel can only agree a sanction that sits within this policy. If it
wishes to recommend an alternative sanction it will need to make a recommendation to the Chair of ACC.
27.11.4 The student will be notified in writing of the outcome within 5-10 working days of the Panel decision. The
written outcome will include:
•

the decision reached;

•

the reasons for the decision;

•

details of any sanction applied;

•

information about the student’s right to request a Stage 4 hearing;

•

the grounds on which such a request may be made; and

•

the applicable deadlines.

Appeals against Stage 3 decisions
27.11.5 A student who remains dissatisfied with the outcome of the Stage 3 ACC Panel may request an internal
appeal by way of a full hearing before the Appeals and Conduct Committee (Stage 4 hearing).
27.11.6 The following grounds must be met to request a hearing:
a) The decision of the previous Panel members was unreasonable considering the evidence available.
b) The procedure was deficient in a way which materially prejudiced the student’s case. Or
c) New evidence has emerged.
27.11.7 A request for a Stage 4 hearing must be submitted to the Student Casework team within 10 working days
of the date of the Stage 3 outcome letter.
27.11.8 Any requests received after 10 working days will not be permitted unless there are exceptional
circumstances which can be supported by evidence which delayed the student requesting this (refer to
Exceptional Circumstances Policy for details on appropriate evidence section 13).
27.11.9 The University will determine whether the stated grounds have been met and will provide written reasons for
its decision where it determines grounds have not been met. The Casework team will discuss cases with the
Chair of the ACC. Where permission for a Stage 4 hearing is granted, the matter will proceed to Stage 4 of
this procedure. Where permission for a Stage 4 hearing is refused, if the student believes that valid grounds
for the hearing request has been provided but not accepted, the student may challenge the decision by
appealing to the Vice Chancellor within 10 working days of the decision. Further details on this process
can be found in section 27.14.

27.11.10 The immigration status of students who hold a Student Visa will be affected by an enforced withdrawal of
enrolment; the change of circumstance will be reported to UK Visas and Immigration (UKVI). The report to
UKVI will not be withdrawn just because a student has submitted a request for a full committee hearing. The
report to UKVI will only be withdrawn if the outcome from the hearing is changed and enables the student to
return to their studies.

Stage 4: Full hearing of the Appeals and Conduct Committee
27.12.1 A full hearing of the Appeals and Conduct Committee will take if the student’s request for consideration by
the ACC has met the grounds for referral The student will be notified at least 5 days in advance of the time
and place of the meeting.
27.12.2 At least two committee members will be present at the hearing. The Committee will not include any
representatives from the student’s programme area to ensure that its decision-making is independent. It will
consider:
•

Whether the evidence is sufficient to justify the conclusion that the student has committed academic
misconduct.

•

Whether the proposed sanction is appropriate considering all the evidence and in accordance with
the guidelines set out below.

27.12.3 A representative from the student’s school will be present to represent the School perspective. The student
is also entitled to be present to speak on their own behalf.
27.12.4 The student may choose to be accompanied by a supporter at the hearing as defined in section 2.1.11. The
student’s supporter cannot ask questions, interpret the student’s responses, or speak on the student’s
behalf. If the student’s supporter behaves inappropriately at any stage while the hearing is being dealt with,
this person will be asked to withdraw involvement. The student will be asked to provide the name and
capacity in which the supporter is attending in advance. It is not normally expected that the student will have
legal representation, but if the student believes it is justified in the circumstances, the student should make
these reasons known to the Head of Governance and Compliance, as Chair of Appeals and Conduct
Committee, at least 3 working days in advance of the hearing. If the Chair believes the student has
established compelling grounds for legal representation, it will be permitted.
27.12.5 The meeting may take place physically or via videoconferencing.
27.12.6 If it is not possible to make contact with the student or if the student chooses not to attend, the Committee
may go ahead in their absence.
27.12.7 Whether or not the student attends, the student may submit explanations or evidence about the case in
writing at least 3 working days in advance of the meeting, and this will be considered by the Committee
members.
27.12.8 The student will not usually be informed of the outcome on the day of the hearing. The student will receive
the outcome in writing, with reasons, as soon as possible after the hearing, and normally within 10 working
days. The Panel can only agree a sanction that sits within this policy; if it wishes to recommend an
alternative sanction it will need make a recommendation to the Chair of ACC.

Sanctions for academic misconduct
27.13.1 Sanctions reflect seriousness, intent and study level.
27.13.2 Multiple offences of reported academic misconduct will be classed as concurrent offences if they occur
within 1 month of each other or before the student receives the outcome from Stage 3 in writing, for
example, where a student submits 2 assignments at the same time. This means that a student is considered
to have committed 2 first offences (for example), rather than a first and second offence.
27.13.3 If a student had an offence(s) at undergraduate level and went on to have an offence at postgraduate level,
this would be considered a subsequent offence.
27.13.4 If a student had an offence and then restarts their studies or has marks voided, while marks may be voided,
the offence would still be considered as an offence, so any further instances would be considered
subsequent offences.
27.13.5 The student will only be permitted to resubmit work where they are entitled to another resubmission attempt
in accordance with the University Regulations. If the academic misconduct affects resubmitted work,
students will not normally be entitled to a further attempt.
27.13.6 Where a student is permitted another resubmission attempt, the resubmission completed will need to be a
new assessment as detailed in section 33.1.1. The resubmission attempt cannot be a rework of the original
assessment, including capstones and dissertations, except in exceptional circumstances where ACC may
approve this. In addition to this, the student may be obliged to undertake an alternative assessment as
detailed in section 11.

27.13.7 Where an ACC Panel wish to implement a sanction that does not align with the list below, it must do so as a
recommendation to the Chair of ACC. The Chair of ACC will then determine whether an alternative sanction
is reasonable given the facts of the case and taking account of other cases. Where the Chair of ACC
determines that an alternative sanction is not justified, the standard sanction will normally be implemented.
Exceptional circumstances
27.13.8 The student may ask for other factors to be considered, but personal difficulties are unlikely to be seen as
excusing academic misconduct. A sanction will not be reduced based on the fact that the student ran out of
time to complete their work, mistakenly submitted a draft rather than a final version, or had IT difficulties.
Stage 3: ACC
27.13.9 The ACC can issue the following sanctions:
Offence

Sanctions

First offence on a first
attempt

Resit for a capped pass for the module

First offence on a resit

No further attempt*

Second offence on a first
attempt (Level 3-5 only)

Resit for a capped pass for the module

Second offence on a resit
(Level 3-5 only)

No further attempt*

Second offence on a first
attempt or resit (Level 6-8)

Enforced withdrawal

Third offence (all levels)

Enforced withdrawal
* No further attempt may result in the student being withdrawn due to
not meeting progression requirements

Withdrawal
27.13.10 Where students’ studies are withdrawn due to findings of academic misconduct or as a result of not being
able to progress or continue on their programme of study, students will exit with the credits that have been
through the ratification processes at the time of the first communication to the student about the concern that
eventually led to the withdrawal decision by the Appeals and Conduct Committee.
Updating student records
27.13.11 No mark is awarded, for work affected by academic misconduct and this means that the student does not
receive any credits for that work.
•

Where a sanction is for a module mark to be capped at the pass mark, credits are awarded provided
all the module’s component marks are sufficient to achieve an overall pass for the module. If
successfully passed the module mark will always be capped at the pass mark due to reassessment
regulations.

•

Credit may be awarded if the final module mark is in the compensable range, where eligible, when
applying the compensation rules.

•

Where the academic misconduct reassessment is not of passing standard the mark for the
component is retained and is used to determine the final module mark, and a grade of AF will be
given.

27.13.12 Academic misconduct may be identified after marks have been ratified. Where this happens, the above
process should still take place and any mark amendments processed accordingly.

Final institutional review – VC review
27.14.1 A student who remains dissatisfied following either:
•

a Stage 4 hearing outcome; or

•

a refusal to permit a Stage 4 hearing under section 27.11.9.

may request a final institutional review by the Vice Chancellor or nominee.
27.14.2 The request should be submitted within 10 working days from the date on the relevant outcome letter. It is
recommended that the student uses the Appeal to Vice Chancellor form available on the University Appeals
page. This stage constitutes a review rather than a rehearing of the case.

27.14.3 Students may also wish to seek guidance and support from the York St John Students’ Union.
27.14.4 The immigration status of students who hold a Student Visa will be affected by an enforced withdrawal of
enrolment; the change of circumstance will be reported to UK Visas and Immigration (UKVI). The report to
UKVI will not be withdrawn just because a student has submitted an appeal. The report to UKVI will only be
withdrawn if the appeal is successful and the student is permitted to return to the programme.
27.14.5 For stage 4 outcomes the grounds for requesting a final institutional review are limited to:
•

The decision of the Committee was unreasonable considering the evidence available.

•

The procedure of the hearing was deficient in a way which materially prejudiced the student’s case.

27.14.6 For cases related to a refusal to permit a Stage 4 hearing, if the Vice Chancellor or nominee agrees with the
challenge that valid grounds were provided, the case will proceed to a Stage 4 hearing.
27.14.7 All cases at this stage will be reviewed by the Vice Chancellor or nominee, and this decision will be final
regarding to university procedures. This review will normally limit itself to the written material relating to the
case at all previous stages along with the student appeal form.
27.14.8 The student will receive the outcome in writing as soon as possible and normally within 10 working days. At
this point, if the appeal is not upheld, the student will receive a ‘Completion of Procedures’ letter explaining
that the student has come to the end of university procedures. If the student is still dissatisfied, the student
may apply for a review by the Office of the Independent Adjudicator for Higher Education.

Post award discovery
27.15.1 If misconduct emerges after graduation the award may be reconsidered, classification amended or revoked.
The student would be given an opportunity to respond to a report prior to any action being taken.

Office of the Independent Adjudicator for Higher Education
27.16.1 The Office of the Independent Adjudicator for Higher Education (OIA) is an independent body which was
established by the Higher Education Act 2004 to consider student complaints which had not been resolved
through an institution’s internal procedures. It became the statutory body for dealing with such student
complaints on 1 January 2005. If a student receives a ‘Completion of Procedures’ letter from the University
and the student remains dissatisfied with the outcome, the student may ask the OIA to review their case.
The student must normally apply to the OIA within 12 months of the date of the ‘Completion of Procedures’
letter. This service is free to students. More information can be found on the OIA website.
27.16.2 Students may also wish to seek guidance and support from the York St John Students’ Union.

Arrangements for validated partners
27.17.1 Academic misconduct in programmes of study leading to an award of York St John University delivered by a
partner organisation through a validation arrangement will be dealt with as follows:
Arrangements
•

The partner organisation will follow its own procedures for hearing an academic misconduct
case.

•

These procedures are approved by York St John University when the programme is validated.

•

Students should be able to access information about these procedures.

•

Students will receive the decision in the writing.

•

If a student is dissatisfied with the outcome, the student may submit a request in writing to the
Vice Chancellor of York St John University that it be reviewed.

•

The student should do so within 10 working days of the date of the outcome letter.

•

The Vice Chancellor or nominee will review the case and will decide upon it. The Vice
Chancellor may seek the advice of the Appeals and Conduct Committee.

•

The decision of the Vice Chancellor will be final. A ‘Completion of Procedures’ letter will be
issued following the Vice Chancellor’s decision.

•

If the student is still dissatisfied, the student may then refer the matter to the Office of the
Independent Adjudicator for Higher Education as set out above.

Monitoring and review
27.18.1 The University will keep and dispose of all correspondence relating to case of academic misconduct in
accordance with its records management policy.
27.18.2 A report on academic misconduct cases and their outcomes will be produced annually and submitted to the
University Assessment Board for consideration. A summary report will be considered by Academic Board
and the Board of Governors through the Annual Quality Report. This process will ensure appropriate
monitoring of all academic misconduct cases and related outcomes.

Academic misconduct procedure flowchart
Academic
Misconduct
(AM) suspected

Evidence
gathered
by School

Student notified &
may be requested
to provide material

School updates record system result to a 0H (holding
grade) when entering marks/grades prior to SAB

Student may be asked to
attend an oral exam (ACC
approval required)
Reported AM investigated by
School

Student invited to a meeting, usually within 10 working
days following reported AM investigation by School

No case found

No further formal action

Student notified of
outcome

Case found to be poor
scholarship

Case found to be
academic misconduct

Outcome noted on
record; School sends
Chair’s Action to
Assessment team in
Registry with original
mark

Student notified of
outcome

Student may be referred to
Academic Liaison Librarian,
the Study Development team
or the London Learning and
Wellness team

Case & sanction
recommendation
forwarded to ACC
Case & sanction
reviewed by ACC panel

AM not found - case
dismissed

AM upheld by ACC

Sanction recommended
by Panel approved by
ACC

Substitute sanction
approved by ACC

School asked by ACC to
investigate further

Refer to full ACC
hearing

Student informed of
outcome in writing
Student informed of outcome in writing by ACC
If student is dissatisfied
with the outcome, they
can appeal to VC
Student accepts findings
& sanction applied
(refer to next page)

Student disputes
finding &/or sanction

Appeal reviewed by VC
Student informed of
outcome in writing

If student still
dissatisfied with the
outcome, they can
appeal with OIA

Student accepts
outcome & sanction

Sanction - enforced
withdrawal of enrolment

ACC notifies
Assessment team in
Registry of the outcome
& sanction

Sanction – no further
attempt as AM occurred
in a resubmission
attempt

Student sent formal
enforced withdrawal of
enrolment email by
Student Casework

Assessment team in Registry
updates record system to 0AH
grade (AM case found
pending result), or adds an AF
grade (AM finalised) if no
further attempts, or AX grade
if the sanction is enforced
withdrawal of enrolment

AM occurred in first
attempt

Sanction – Resubmit for

maximum of capped
pass mark

Student resubmits &
work marked
Student’s enrolment of
studies is withdrawn due
to academic failure
SAB Chair’s Action sent
with result to
Assessment team in
Registry

Action taken as
appropriate in
accordance with award
& progression rules

Assessment team in
Registry updates
records system with
result, applying the
penalty & entering with
a grade of AP/AF (AM
finalised)
