1

AM Academic Misconduct Policy and Procedures
AM Academic Misconduct Policy and Procedures

2

AM1. Scope and definitions

4

AM2. The Academic Misconduct procedures

11

AM3. Academic Misconduct penalties

166

AM4. Composition, responsibilities and procedures relating to StAMP Investigatory Panels

255

AM5 Academic Misconduct Disciplinary Procedure

278

AM6. Appeals

29

AM7. General advice and training for students

300

AM8. General advice to departments and examiners

322

AM Appendix 1: Flowchart of procedure academic misconduct cases - staff E-accessible Text
Version

344

AM Appendix 2: Flowchart of procedure academic misconduct cases - student E-accessible Text
Version
355
AM Appendix 3: Documenting and considering evidence of false authorship

366

AM Appendix 4: Procedure for Academic Misconduct in Low-credit assessment

377

2

Introduction
Academic integrity is fundamental to the reputation of individual scholars and to academic
institutions. As a signatory of the QAA’s Academic Integrity Charter, the University of York is
committed both to developing high standards of academic practice among its students and to
safeguarding the standards of its academic awards by detecting and acting upon cases of academic
misconduct. The policies and procedures described in this booklet are mainly concerned with the
second of these aims, but they also suggest guidelines for informing and educating students about
good and bad academic practice.
The Academic Misconduct policy, guidelines and procedures apply to all programmes leading to
awards of the University and should be read in conjunction with the University Regulations. In
exceptional cases where suspected academic misconduct cannot be straightforwardly covered by
these procedures, the Chair of the Standing Committee on Assessment, or their nominated
representative, will decide on the appropriate course of action.
The University’s Pro-Vice-Chancellor for Teaching, Learning and Students is formally responsible for
ensuring that the institution is dealing effectively with student plagiarism and other academic
misconduct issues.
The policy and procedures for academic misconduct are monitored and reviewed by the University’s
Standing Committee on Assessment on behalf of the University Teaching Committee and University
Senate. Management of the procedures and records connected to academic misconduct is the
responsibility of the Exams and Graduation Team in Student Administration and Academic Affairs,
who may be contacted by email on academic-misconduct@york.ac.uk.

3

AM1. Scope and definitions
AM1.1 Scope
These procedures apply to supplementary, foundation certificate1, foundation degree, certificate,
diploma, undergraduate, graduate, pre-Masters1, taught postgraduate programmes and the taught
components of research degrees. They apply to all assessed work, even if that work does not
contribute to an award, to module marks or to progression. Academic misconduct procedures may
apply to the assessments of students who are also staff members.

AM1.2 The forms of academic misconduct
The University is committed to developing high standards of academic practice among its staff and
students, and to safeguarding the standards of its academic awards to individuals. The University
regards any form of academic misconduct as an extremely serious matter [see Regulation 5.7].
Academic misconduct offences are divided into two categories: assessment and disciplinary.
Assessment offences are committed by a student(s) in work submitted for assessment for their own
programme of study and for which the penalty or judgement can be applied to the assessed piece of
work. Disciplinary offences are offences committed by students, or staff, that are intended to gain an
advantage in assessment (for themselves or for others) where the penalty cannot normally be
attached to a specific piece of their own academic work.
In order to be confident about the standards of academic awards it is essential that work submitted
for assessment is a fair reflection of the abilities of the student having used legitimate resources and
forms of support in the production of their academic work. The definitions listed below seek to make
clear the boundaries between authorised and unauthorised support. For example, the offence of
false authorship states clearly that it is an offence for students to use generative AI, commercial
assignment writing services, or to seek the help of friends and family in improving their assessed
work. Similarly, the definition of the offence of personation specifically covers students providing
material to commercial assignment writing services, as a sign of the University’s commitment to
academic integrity across the higher education sector.

AM1.2.1 Assessment Offences
1) Plagiarism – the presentation of ideas, material, or scholarship sourced from the work of
another individual or group available in a public or private source without sufficient
acknowledgement via appropriate referencing and citation.
2) Collusion between students taking the same assessment – is the process whereby two or
more students work together – without official approval – and share ideas, solutions or
material in work submitted for assessment.
3) (a)Breach and/or (b)Cheating – failure to comply with the rules of an assessment e.g.
unauthorised access to materials in a closed assessment/ use of software in open assessment
which has been specifically prohibited in the assessment specifications/ breaches of ethical
rules relating to an assessment/ misrepresentation of word counts. (For guidance go to
section 1.3.17 and 2.1.2).2
1
2

See AM1.3.13 Probationary modules.
For guidance on prohibited software contact SCA@york.ac.uk

4

4) False Authorship is the production or adaptation of academic work (for example writing,
computer code, images, data), in whole or part, for academic credit, progression and award
whether or not a payment or other favour is involved, using unapproved, undeclared or
falsely declared human (eg family members, friends, essay mills or other students not taking
the same assessment) or technological assistance (eg generative AI or software). 3
5) Fabrication – to seek to gain advantage by incorporating falsified or fabricated material or
data in work submitted for assessment or publication.

AM1.2.2 Disciplinary Offences
6) Personation – one, or both of, a) to produce work for another student with the reasonable
expectation that the incorporation of that work is intended to deceive an examiner, such as
appearing as another student in an assessment(s) or b) students providing material to
commercial assignment writing services.
7) Deception – presenting fabricated or misleading evidence to gain advantage in assessment
arrangements (e.g. exceptional circumstances affecting assessment), in making research
proposals or providing false evidence of qualifications.
8) Unethical research behaviour – unethical behaviour in the undertaking of research or in
seeking funding e.g. including failure to obtain appropriate permission to conduct research,
unauthorised use of information which was acquired confidentially, failure to acknowledge
work conducted in collaboration, fraud or misuse of research funds or equipment.

AM1.2.3 Differential procedures for assessment and disciplinary offences of academic
misconduct
Offences 1-5 (assessment offences) are dealt with within schools, departments and faculties through
Standing Academic Misconduct Investigatory Panels.
Offences 6-8 (disciplinary offences) are dealt with by University Regulation 7 Disciplinary Procedures
or other existing mechanisms. [AM5]

AM1.2.4 Academic misconduct alleged subsequent to the conferment of an award
Any offence, as defined above, alleged or discovered after the award of a degree from the University
of York may be considered under Ordinance 7: Deprivation or Revocation of Academic Qualifications.

AM1.3 General principles
AM1.3.1 Burden and standard of proof
It is sufficient to establish cases of academic misconduct ‘on the balance of probabilities’, rather than
‘beyond all reasonable doubt’. This means that the Standing Academic Misconduct Investigatory
3

Adapted from the European Network for Academic Integrity’s suggested definition of Unauthorised Content
Generation.

5

Panel needs only believe that it is likely that misconduct occurred, rather than the process requiring
that the evidence be indisputable that misconduct has occurred. Decisions must be supported by a
rationale and, importantly, evidence which are both clearly explained to the student. The burden lies
on the university to show, on the balance of probabilities, that the acts constituting the alleged
academic misconduct occurred. In the case of special mitigation of penalties (3.8) the burden of
proof will be on students to prove their judgement was affected if they wish this to be taken into
account in consideration of the appropriate penalty.

AM1.3.2 Academic Judgement
Academic judgement is ”a judgement that is made about a matter where the opinion of an academic
expert is essential”4. It is therefore not open to appeal (Reg 6.7.1.d). In considering academic
misconduct cases, the StAMP Investigatory Panel members are chosen so that there is academic
expertise to make decisions that may involve academic judgement.
1. Decisions that involve academic judgement. When the an academic staff member
scrutinises assessed work as part of an academic misconduct investigation, they will seek to
evaluate the evidence for misconduct in that piece of work and determine, on the balance of
probabilities, whether an offence has been committed and the nature of that offence. They
will also determine the extent of the academic misconduct - i.e. the extent to which the
student misrepresented the work as their own. These decisions involve the exercise of
academic judgement.
2. Decisions that do not normally require academic judgement: Once the nature and extent of
the academic misconduct has been determined under step 1, the corresponding penalty set
out on the penalty table in Part 3 of the policy should be applied, as modified where
necessary for any mitigating factors as set out in [3.7]. Once the level of misconduct has
been established, the corresponding penalty that should be applied and any mitigation to be
considered, would not normally involve academic judgement. Establishing matters of fact,
based on evidence, (e.g. establishing whether or there has been a breach of assessment
rules) do not normally involve academic judgement.

AM1.3.3 Responsibility of the student
The student shall be considered responsible for the academic integrity of all work they submit for
assessment, including group assessments. If insufficiently acknowledged material is discovered in
open assessments by examiners, the question of whether the student has behaved (or intended to
behave) dishonestly or unethically must not be a factor in the decision to report the case to the
relevant assessment officer. The pedagogic aim of the academic misconduct policy and its use of
marks caps is to reflect the academic merit of any work produced by such misconduct. Therefore,
expressions of guilt, remorse or lack of intent are neither to be accepted as justifications for any
alleged misconduct or in determining how a student should be dealt with where such misconduct is
established. The principle that the student is responsible for their actions also applies to the
reporting of any illicit material brought into closed examinations by students.

4

Office for the Independent Adjudicator (OIA) glossary, 2019. https://www.oiahe.org.uk/information/glossary/.

6

AM1.3.4 Sufficient acknowledgement of sources
The aim in all assessed work should be for the student to make a clear distinction between their own
ideas and those drawn from other sources. The University expects all scholars to be able to
paraphrase source material with appropriate citations, include page references in the citations
appropriately where material is quoted directly, present secondary citations in a way that makes
clear the extent of their own scholarship, present data accurately, produce an accurate reference list
and consistently follow the referencing system mandated by their school/department(s), or editors
of journals and/or commissioners of other academic outputs.
The extent to which students deviate from this expectation should be reflected in the marks given to
the work and the extent to which a student should be adjudged to be deliberately misleading the
examiner(s) in the presentation of the work.
Sufficient acknowledgement of sources is also expected of students in closed examinations, although
the form which that acknowledgement takes may be less stringent than in open assessments.

AM1.3.5 Improving of assessed work by third parties prior to submission
The aim of assessment is to establish the level of understanding, skills and performance of the
individual student enrolled on the programme rather than measuring the extent of the student’s
social and/or familial networks’ level of understanding, skills and performance. Proofreading should
only be done in accordance with the University Guidance on Proofreading, Translation and Editing
which can be found here:
●

●

Students are responsible for making the guidelines on proofreading, translation and editing
and the rules against false authorship, clear to any third party they ask to check their work
for English language usage and presentation.
Support given in acknowledgement of a specific disability, and agreed by the relevant Board
of Studies, are not considered to be inappropriate support.

AM1.3.6 Penalising assessment offences of academic misconduct
Wherever possible it is the module to which the assessment is connected that contains the penalty
for academic misconduct. If a student is found to have committed academic misconduct on a
submitted assessment the penalty must be applied to the mark of the submitted piece of work. This
will ensure the effect of any mark reduction is proportionate to the stage of the degree. The mark
awarded to a piece of work affected by academic misconduct should, as a matter of principle, be
treated the same as any other mark awarded as a part of the award (e.g. a module failed as a result
of academic misconduct will be treated in the same way as a module failed for inadequate
scholarship or incorrect work.)
The process for applying a marks cap is as follows:
1. StAMP agrees marks cap
2. Work is returned to marker
3. Marker completes the marking of the work as normal (mark may be higher or lower than the
cap)
4. Late penalties and overlength penalties applied to the uncapped mark
5. The AM cap is then applied to the mark

7

Please note, the marks cap is not the final mark for the assessment but the maximum mark
achievable for the piece of work. After conclusion of the academic misconduct case, the work must
be marked as normal, and feedback provided within normal timescales, and the final mark may be
lower than the applied marks cap.

AM1.3.7 Exceptional Circumstances as a defence for academic misconduct
Where academic misconduct is alleged or suspected, a student may not use exceptional
circumstances – as defined by the University’s Exceptional Circumstances affecting Assessment
Policy - as a defence for the offence. The only exceptions are cases where, in the professional
opinion of appropriate professionals, the student’s condition at the time of the offence was such
that they were unable to differentiate between right and wrong in relation to their actions. Where
the condition is longstanding, it can only be used as a defence where adjustments have not been
made, and the lack of adjustments is not the fault of the student. The Investigatory Panel should not
infer the inability to differentiate between right and wrong from a more general diagnosis of mental
health issues; the professional evidence presented to the panel must specifically address this
question in relation to the student’s psychological state at the time of the alleged offence.
In the event that exceptional circumstances are claimed and upheld against the same assessment for
which a suspicion of misconduct is upheld, any marks caps applied to the original assessment will
also apply to any ‘sit as if for the first time’ allowed to compensate for the exceptional
circumstances. The student should be informed of this, but may benefit from the ‘sit as if for the first
time’ if their original mark was not as high as the cap set by the StAMP.
Examiners should not, if a claim of exceptional circumstances has been made, use the existence of
those circumstances as a factor in the decision to report the case to the module co-ordinator,
departmental StAMP representative or SCA regardless of whether the claim has been accepted by
the ECA Committee.
For consideration of personal circumstances as a mitigation for the applied penalty, see section 3.7.

AM1.3.8 Failure to detect academic misconduct in the past
Where academic misconduct is alleged or suspected, a student may not use as a defence the failure
of any member of academic staff to detect academic misconduct at an earlier point in time in their
studies.
When a suspicion is raised about a given piece of work, departments may not return to any work
which has been returned to the student with marks and feedback to refer it to an Investigatory Panel
or apply penalties. Schools and departments may, however, review previous work outside of the
Academic Misconduct procedures to determine if any pedagogic or formative feedback can be given
to the student and considered by the school/ department based on patterns of behaviour across
multiple pieces of work.

AM1.3.9 Misconduct in formative work
Formative assessment is primarily designed to give feedback on progress and inform development
but does not contribute to a module mark. In this spirit, if the affected work does not count towards
an award, a transcript mark, or a progression decision, the misconduct should normally be addressed
by specific and extensive feedback on the issue that has raised concern.

8

AM1.3.10 Misconduct in re-assessment tasks
Where a student commits academic misconduct and subsequently fails a progression hurdle, a resit
opportunity for the module or modules affected by academic misconduct may be granted if the
programme regulations would ordinarily provide a resit opportunity to a student who had obtained
the same profile of marks without misconduct. The marks obtained at resit will be used to make a
progression decision in the usual way.
If a student is found to have committed misconduct in a reassessment and thereby fails the
progression hurdle, no further reassessment opportunity should be given.

AM1.3.11 Misconduct by students repeating a year of study
Repeating students are welcome to use their previously submitted work for their own learning and
reference, in the same way they would use third‐party information, but they should not re‐submit
work for assessment and would be considered as self-plagiarism.

AM1.3.12 Standing Academic Misconduct Panels (StAMPs) & Investigatory Panels
One of the overarching aims of the Academic Misconduct Policy is to ensure consistency of decisionmaking and judgements across academic departments and units in relation to the handling of
academic misconduct cases. The Standing Academic Misconduct Panel (StAMP) is the mechanism by
which the University ensures Academic Misconduct procedures reflect the assessment principles of
consistency, clarity, transparency and equity.
The Standing Committee on Assessment, acting on behalf of the University, will constitute a
Standing Academic Misconduct Panel (StAMP) for each of the three faculties. The StAMP is
comprised of nominated academic members of schools, departments or centres within the faculty.
Schools/ departments will normally provide at least three academic members of staff to their faculty
StAMP, but will be asked to identify substitute members to cover in the event of extended period of
absences of their StAMP representatives.
When a case of academic misconduct requires investigation by a StAMP, the investigating panel will
be formed and will be chaired by a member of the department from which the affected module
originates and two other members from the faculty of which their department is a member. This is
to foster a consistent approach to academic misconduct cases whilst also sharing caseloads between
members of staff.

AM1.3.13 Probationary modules
Some modules will be deemed to be ‘probationary’. Suspected incidents of plagiarism and collusion
that take place in probationary modules can be dealt with outside of the normal procedures, and
exclusively within the department. The emphasis in terms of response should be on the student
correcting their errors and understanding of academic integrity, although a marks reduction will
normally still be appropriate. Modules in Stage 0 (Foundation) and 1 of all undergraduate
programmes are deemed to be probationary unless otherwise approved (see below), as are all
modules offered by the International Pathway College at both Foundation Certificate and PreMasters level.
Probationary modules in other stages of an undergraduate programme or anywhere on a Taught
Postgraduate programme and non-probationary modules in Stage 0 or 1 of an undergraduate
programme need the specific approval of the Standing Committee on Assessment. In order to be
approved as probationary the learning outcomes of the modules and assessments must include the

9

development of writing and academic integrity skills. Boards of Examiners should keep a record of
any modules exceptionally included or excluded as probationary.
Offences other than plagiarism and collusion should be dealt with through a normal StAMP, even in
modules which are otherwise probationary.

AM1.3.14 Second offences
A second offence means an offence discovered after procedures for the first offence have been
completed. Two offences of the same type penalised with an outright fail need to be committed
under the policy for the penalties for second offences to apply [see penalty table 3.4 and Academic
Misconduct penalties for disciplinary procedures to see AM5].

AM1.3.15 Self-plagiarism and re-use of previously assessed work
Self-plagiarism is not deemed to be an academic offence under this policy due to different
disciplines’ approach to the reuse of assessed material within a degree. Departments should set
assessment tasks that encourage and require new material. Students, however, should be advised
that the re-use of academic work is poor practice and that if they re-use work, it should be
acknowledged. If departments wish to penalise students for the re-use of work (e.g. markers ignore
extensively re-used material), they should make this clear in their departmental handbook and
include student guidance on referencing their own work.

AM1.3.16 Academic Misconduct in Low-credit assessments
Minor academic misconduct in low-stakes (i.e. low credit equivalent) assessments can, in limited
circumstances, be handled by individual departments without referral to a full StAMP process.
Low-Credit assessments, for this purpose, are defined as a distinct assessment that is worth the
equivalent of ≤2 credits (e.g. 10% of a 20 credit module). Minor academic misconduct in low-credit
assessments may be dealt with by the department, the procedure for doing so is set-out in Appendix
4. A departmental record of the decision must be kept and students must be informed of their right
to the case being considered by an academic misconduct panel in accordance with the full policy and
procedure.

AM1.3.17 Ethical breaches:
Two types of ethical issue may occur in taught programmes:
1. Breaching the rules of an assessment, where that rule relates to ethical requirements
(Assessment Offence: Cheating/Breach).
Consideration: If a student breaches ethical guidelines in a specific assessment, for example
does not gain ethical approval for research, or has ethical approval rejected but carries out
the research regardless, then this is considered a breach of assessment rules and the
corresponding penalty tables may therefore be used. The warning is issued in the case
where the breach has happened but where there is no obvious advantage to the student.
Usually there would be an advantage gained if a student did not adhere to ethical rules.

10

2. Breaching ethical expectations in undertaking research, but not specifically relating to a
particular submitted piece of assessment (Disciplinary Offence: Unethical Research
Behaviour).
Consideration: This may be unethical behaviour in the undertaking of research or in seeking
funding e.g. including failure to obtain appropriate permission to conduct research,
unauthorised use of information which was acquired confidentially, failure to acknowledge
work conducted in collaboration, fraud or misuse of research funds or equipment. Where
unethical research behaviour is reported to the Academic Misconduct Administrator or is
identified by the StAMP the Chair should refer the process to the Academic Misconduct
Disciplinary Procedure under Regulation 7.

AM2. The Academic Misconduct procedures
These procedures should be followed for students on all programmes.
They are illustrated in Appendices 1 and 2.

AM2.1 Initiating procedures
AM2.1.1 Initiating the procedures in respect of plagiarism
Where the examiner(s) believe that the assessed work contains evidence of plagiarism (i.e. the
insufficient acknowledgement of sources) the examiner(s) must come to a decision about the extent
of the misconduct:
a) Where there is the occasional referencing error (i.e. where the same minor error is not
frequently repeated or a pattern of mistakes cannot be seen), the marker notes this in the
feedback and is specific about the error and can reduce the mark or not using academic
judgement or departmental policy/grade descriptors. Work matching this description need
not be referred to the Standing Academic Misconduct Panel.
b) Where there is evidence of more widespread or systematic misunderstanding, or of badly
executed paraphrasing or acknowledgement of sources, or of another misconduct offence
then the examiner(s) should bring this to the attention of the module co-ordinator together
with evidence of the errors/ misrepresentation that is causing concern. The module coordinator will then send details of the case(s) to academic-misconduct@york.ac.uk.
c) The information provided must include the student’s name, number, and programme of
study, and the student’s previous record in relation to academic misconduct.
d) The examiner must provide a statement indicating the reasons for their suspicion, and
evidence of the suspicious nature of the assessment (potentially including a Turnitin report,
or annotated copy of the script). This statement should indicate specific pages, paragraphs
or phrases which are raising concern, rather than simply being an indication of duplicated
text, and should include enough detail to allow the panel to investigate without subject
specific knowledge.

11

e) A member of the exams team, acting on behalf of the Standing Committee on Assessment,
will nominate a StAMP member from the reporting department/ unit to act as Chair on the
case and provide the names of two other StAMP members who will be assigned to the
case(s), together with an SCA contact. The StAMP Investigatory Panel will normally be
assigned within 5 working days of the initial report.
f)

In cases of suspected false authorship, the StAMP Investigatory Panel should consider the
evidence provided in the statement of suspicion of false authorship and the previous
assignments submitted by the student for a comparison. The panel has further powers to
request a compulsory interview with the student and to receive preparatory documents for
the paper – for example, notes and drafts of the assignments where available. Lack of
preparatory work may be considered evidence of false authorship.

AM2.1.2 Initiating the procedures in respect of breach/cheating in closed exams
Where the invigilator(s) of a closed examination have reported a suspected case of cheating any
unauthorised material must be removed, a full report made using the ‘Unauthorised Material Form’
and the Exams and Graduation Office informed immediately following the exam.
i.

Breach: First offence
In cases of cheating where a breach of assessment regulations has taken place but where no
advantage is apparent: the report from the Senior Invigilator, the evidence and the details of
the student will be checked by the Exams and Graduation Office. A formal warning letter will
be issued by the Exams and Graduation Office to the student and a record kept.

ii.

Second Breach
In cases of cheating where a breach of assessment regulations has taken place but where no
advantage is apparent but students have already received a formal warning: the report from
the Senior Invigilator, the evidence and the details of the student will be checked by the
Exams and Graduation Office. The information will then be forwarded to a nominated
departmental representative(s) of the relevant Standing Academic Misconduct Panel to
initiate a StAMP investigation. The Exams Office will highlight that this is a second offence to
the StAMP Investigatory Panel and SCA member and recommend that the mark should be in
the 0-59 range rather than convening a full investigation. The student should be informed of
this decision (see 2.2.2).

iii.

Serious Breach/Cheating
The report from the Senior Invigilator, the evidence and the details of the student will be
sent by the Exams Office to a nominated departmental representative(s) of the relevant
Standing Academic Misconduct Panel to initiate a StAMP investigation. The Exams Office will
also nominate an SCA member to assist the StAMP Investigatory Panel. A full investigation of
the case will follow and the panel may choose from the penalty table in section 3.3

iv.

Unauthorised Calculators
In cases where a student has brought an unauthorised calculator into a formal examination
where no special arrangement has been made by their department, the StAMP Investigatory
Panel should judge that they have an unfair advantage, whether intended or not and their
mark therefore be capped at a compensatable fail. If pre-programmed information
potentially relevant to the exam has been found on the confiscated calculator, then a mark
of zero should be applied.

12

v.

Second Offences in cases of breach/cheating
In terms of second offences, breach and serious breach/cheating are considered different
offences. Therefore a student may have an ongoing cheating case but still may receive a
formal warning or penalty for breach of assessment rules. Subsequent breaches of
assessment rules will be treated as a repeated breach and will therefore be capped at a
compensatable fail.

AM2.1.3 Initiating the procedure in respect of false authorship
Where the examiner(s) believes that the assessed work contains evidence of false authorship(i.e.
that a third party has either written or significantly contributed to a student’s assignment) the
examiner(s) must provide a statement of suspicion of false authorship (see appendix 3) including
references to specific pages, paragraphs or phrases which are raising concern and should include
enough detail to allow the panel to investigate without subject specific knowledge. It should also
include the student’s anonymous examination number (e.g. Y00000001). The marker should send
the statement to the module co‐ordinator who will then send details of the case(s) to: academic‐
misconduct @york.ac.uk (this procedure is detailed in appendix 3).
In cases of suspected false authorship, the StAMP should consider the evidence provided in the
statement of suspicion of false authorship and the previous assignments submitted by the student
for a comparison. The panel has further powers to request a compulsory interview with the student
and to receive preparatory documents for the assignment – for example, notes and drafts where
available. Lack of preparatory work may be considered evidence of false authorship .

AM2.1.4 Initiating the procedures for disciplinary offences
If a Disciplinary Offence is reported to the Academic Misconduct Administrator or identified by the
StAMP investigatory panel, this should be reported to the Secretary to SCA who will begin the
Disciplinary Procedure. The process in respect of the defined disciplinary offences is different as they
fall under the remit of University Regulation 7 which deals with matters of student discipline. (See
AM5.).

AM2.1.5 Deciding what StAMP is appropriate for the specific case
In the case of combined degrees the case should be sent to the faculty StAMP relevant to the
module the assessment is attached to. Cases from supplementary programmes e.g. Languages for
All, Academic Practice and the Centre for Lifelong Learning should be directed towards the most
appropriate faculty based on departmental affiliation or discipline of the module in question. The
Secretary of SCA will make the decision if there is uncertainty.

AM2.1.6 Specialist knowledge required for judging cases
In certain cases, StAMPs may consult university colleagues with specialist knowledge to help advise
on the case. This may be in relation to computer coding, assessment in a non-native language and
disabilities (in relation to affected judgement).

AM2.1.7 Reporting of Academic Misconduct by third parties (students or external to the
university)
Suspected incidents of academic misconduct reported by a third party will only be considered if the
person reporting the incident is identifiable and contactable and if sufficient and credible evidence is

13

presented which points to academic misconduct. Only in these circumstances will the incident be
investigated by the University. Details of the case will not be shared with the reporting external third
party due General Data Protection Regulations (GDPR). The University has a responsibility to protect
students from malicious acts and considers that making inaccurate or misleading accusations of
misconduct constitutes a serious breach of the University’s disciplinary procedures (REG 7).
Anonymous reporting of academic misconduct will not normally be considered as this could impede
investigation and prevent a fair and equitable resolution. Exceptionally such a report of academic
misconduct may be considered if the University accepts there is a compelling reason, supported by
sufficient and credible evidence, for it to be brought anonymously. This would be considered and
approved by the Chair of SCA.
Where either a University of York student, or external third party, has reason to suspect a University
of York student of academic misconduct, and the conditions outlined above are met, then this may
be reported to academic.misconduct@york.ac.uk.

AM2.2 The initial stage of consideration by the StAMP Investigatory
Panel
AM2.2.1 Initial consideration of case to answer.
The first stage of consideration is whether there is a case to answer. This decision should initially be
made by the StAMP representative from the School/Department. If there is a case to answer, the
StAMP investigatory panel is convened. If there is no case to answer, the work should be returned to
the marker and the case closed. If the StAMP member is unsure, they should refer the case to the
StAMP investigatory panel.

AM2.2.2 Referring cases to StAMP Investigatory Panel for consideration of the case(s)
It is the responsibility of the StAMP representative from the department that reports case(s) of
academic misconduct to contact the other nominated members of the StAMP Investigatory Panel
was it has been decided there is a case to answer.
A StAMP Investigatory Panel may meet virtually if they prefer and should consider the case in
question against their experience of other judgements made in the past by the StAMP in order to
ensure consistency and to try and eliminate risk of bias. The StAMP Investigatory Panel has a
designated member of SCA to advise them on the process. The SCA contact must be copied into all
relevant electronic correspondence between members of the Investigatory Panel and provided with
minutes of all meetings.
The StAMP Investigatory Panel should be convened as quickly as possible so as not to delay
unnecessarily the marking and feedback schedule of the reporting department. In the event that one
of the members of the StAMP becomes unavailable to consider a case, the chair of the panel should
inform academic-misconduct@york.ac.uk as soon as practicable to allow an alternate to be assigned.

14

AM2.2.3 Possible actions as the result of the StAMP Investigatory Panel’s initial stage
consideration of the case(s)
The StAMP Investigatory Panel reviews the initial judgement as to whether the evidence presented
suggests that a full investigation would be appropriate.
a) The panel may determine that the evidence does not warrant further investigation.
Nonetheless, if the work suffers from poor practice in attribution or involves a breach of
assessment regulations, and the offence is one where a marks penalty can be applied, the
work is returned to the marker to assign a mark, they may advise the marker that it is poor
practice and should be taken into account in the marking criteria. Cases where a full
investigation is not held will not count as formal cases of academic misconduct against the
student’s record. These decisions can be considered by future Investigatory StAMPs if future
offences occur, but subsequent penalties in future cases should reflect first offences and not
second.
b) If it is believed that the case warrants a full investigation (see 3.2 for what would be
considered serious in relation to plagiarism), then the StAMP Investigatory Panel Chair (with
support, where appropriate, from their departmental administration team) informs the
student that academic misconduct is suspected, provides the full details of the process
followed, the full evidence that will be considered by the panel and the offence which is
suspected. The student can then respond to the panel within 7 days. The panel will not use
any material to make its judgement unless the student has had sight of it in advance and the
opportunity to respond. The student should be provided with any new evidence which the
panel considers. The student(s) should also be encouraged to seek advice from supervisors,
the Students’ Union or Graduate Students’ Association. The student can, in response, submit
a written statement or request an interview with the relevant StAMP Investigatory Panel
(students should be made aware that there is no inherent benefit to an interview). The panel
will not reach its decision based upon any evidence to which the student has not had
opportunity to respond.
c) In cases involving more than one student the StAMP Investigatory Panel may interview the
students at this point in proceedings to establish whether it is likely to be a case of collusion
or, for example, plagiarism of the work of one by the other.
d) In the event that the student elects to attend an interview, or that the panel determines that
an interview is the most appropriate way to determine the nature of the offence, the Chair
of the StAMP Investigatory Panel must ensure that students are afforded sufficient time (at
least 7 days) before the interview to seek advice or to arrange to be accompanied. Students
have the same right to be accompanied at a StAMP panel interview as they do for an
academic appeal hearing: see the Academic Appeals procedure for details. A student may be
accompanied by any member of the university and exceptions may be made for nonuniversity accompaniment at the discretion of the Chair of the StAMP. The student must
notify the Chair in advance if they intend to bring a representative from outside the
university. It is recommended that students contact YUSU or GSA advice and support who
may accompany them to the hearing. Any interview must include at least two members of
the StAMP Investigatory Panel, including the Chair, and the third member should be
consulted before any decision is made.
e) Where it is the panel, rather than the student, who determines that an interview is required,
all reasonable means should be taken to inform the student, and the student should be
asked to acknowledge receipt of this information prior to the date of the interview. A panel

15

may make this determination even after a written submission by a student. The procedures
should continue regardless of whether a student responds.

AM2.2.4 Possible action following the submission of a student statement to, or interview
with, the StAMP Investigatory Panel
a) If, on the balance of probabilities, misconduct is established, the StAMP Investigatory Panel
determines the penalty to be applied in accordance with Section 3 of this document, and
sends the report and decision to the student, and to the SCA (via academicmisconduct@york.ac.uk) for reporting purposes. The letter informing the student of a
decision to apply a penalty should state the appeal procedures and be sent to the student
within 7 days of a StAMP Investigatory Panel decision having been made.
b) The StAMP Investigatory Panel can request further information from the student and/or the
department.
c) The StAMP Investigatory Panel can decide that on the balance of probabilities misconduct
has not occurred, in which case the work is returned to the marker to assign a mark, with or
without a recommendation that the mark should be restricted to the 0 to 59 marks range as
appropriate for the standard of scholarship.
d) Wherever possible, cases should be resolved prior to the departmental Board of Examiners
meeting to ratify marks. It is accepted that the need to allow students to appropriately
respond, and to allow the panel to reach a just decision may make this impossible. Where
this is the case, the student’s marks should be considered by a special ratification panel as
soon as possible after the conclusion of the investigation.

AM3. Academic Misconduct penalties
If a student is found to have committed academic misconduct on a submitted assessment the
penalty must be applied to the mark of the submitted piece of work in accordance with the following
penalty tables.

AM3.1 Misconduct that occurs in a probationary module
Plagiarism

16

Penalty menu

Choice of any/all of the following:
●
●
●
●
●
●

Marks cap
Thorough feedback if there is opportunity to submit further work on the
module
Academic integrity tutorial to be completed ‘as if for first time’
Undertake Turnitin training and use as condition of submission in future
Consult referencing guidance at this webpage and Skills Guides
Correct work (de-anonymised) and show it to module markers for checking
of referencing as condition of progression

Collusion
●
●
●

Second Offence

Marks cap
Academic integrity tutorial to be completed ‘as if for first time’
Independent work on a new attempt at the same assessment (deanonymised), with module markers checking that it is the student’s own
work, as condition of progression

Plagiarism or Collusion: Formal Warning
False authorship: Dealt with under Academic Misconduct Disciplinary
Procedures (AM5).

Subsequent
Offences of
Plagiarism or
Collusion

Treated as a first offence in line with modules which are not probationary, and
so will be referred to an Investigatory Panel with the normal range of penalties
available.

Cheating, False
authorship,
Fabrication

These offences are not treated any differently in a probationary module than
in a non-probationary module. These offences should be referred to the
StAMP process.

17

AM3.2 Offences which occur in a module which is not probationary
Marks Cap→
Offence↓

0

29UG/39PG

39UG/49PG

59

Plagiarism

A submitted assessment
completely or near
completely copied from
sources, which displays
little or no independent
academic value.

A submitted assessment that suggests
that the inclusion of unattributed
source material is characteristic of the
general approach, where the work as a
whole is predominantly based on
unattributed source material and/or
where key ideas central to the work
are unattributed.

A submitted assessment that includes
a significant proportion of
unattributed material but where the
panel judges there has been a
genuine but flawed attempt to
acknowledge source(s) and attribute
appropriately. should be capped at a
compensatable fail.

A submitted assessment where
there is any one or a combination
of:
● repeated minor errors or
inconsistencies in referencing
or bibliographic accuracy,
● inaccurate quotation,
● a number of and/ or lengthy
incidences of paraphrasing or
synthesis of material that is
inappropriately close to the
wording of the original
source, as these suggest a
lack of understanding of
requirements rather than
careless error.

Collusion

A submitted assessment
so completely or near
completely based on
collusion that it displays
little or no independent
academic value.

A submitted assessment that suggests
the inclusion of a significant proportion
of the work or key ideas central to the
work have resulted from collusion.

A submitted assessment that
includes a proportion of material
resulting from collusion but where
the panel judges this was due to a
genuine confusion by students over
the distinction between working
together and collusion, resulting in a
breach of the rules against collusion.

N/A

False
Authorship

A submitted assessment
so completely or near

A number of elements of the
assessment are the result of

The submitted assessment mostly
reflects the student’s own work but

N/A

18

Fabrication

completely based on
unauthorised content that
it displays little or no
independent academic
value.

unauthorised content or adaptation
work or the submitted item consists
mostly but not necessarily substantially
of elements of unauthorised or
adapted work.

the panel conclude that the
submitted includes elements of
unauthorised content.
Alternatively, the work in question
has been substantially edited or
adapted or improved by a person or
software other than the student
beyond what is permissible by the
University’s proofreading, translation
and editing policy.

A submitted assessment
has little or no academic
value independently of
the fabricated elements.

A number of elements of the
submitted assessment are
demonstrated to be based on
fabrication or the work is based on a
proportion of fabricated data,
outcomes or experiences.

The submitted assessment produced
mostly reflects the student’s actual
experiences but the panel conclude
that elements of the submitted
assessment are not entirely genuine
accounts of the outputs, experiences
or activities presented by the student
rather than based on genuine
experiences or data collection.

N/A

19

AM3.3 Cheating/Breach that occurs in any module
Serious Cheating

Dishonest breach of assessment
regulations where there is sufficient
evidence reasonably to infer an
intention to gain unfair or
inappropriate advantage thereby.
(e.g notes found with the student or
on the student’s body).

0

0

Cheating/
Serious Breach/
Repeated Breach

The panel may decide, in their
academic judgement, to place the
work in the compensatable fail range
if there is a breach of assessment
regulations where an unfair or
inappropriate advantage
(unintentional or otherwise) could be
had or where other students have
been disadvantaged by the breach
(e.g. mobile phone ringing during the
exam, bringing in one’s own
calculator or other data-storage
devices, writing on the exam paper
before the exam begins).

Marks Cap 39

Marks Cap 49

Breach
(Second offence)

As below but where a student has
already received a formal warning.

Marks Cap 59

Marks Cap 59

Breach (First
offence)

Breach of assessment regulations
where no advantage is apparent. (e.g
unauthorized materials with no
perceivable advantage in a pocket or
under table, such as keys or a credit
card).

Formal warning

Formal Warning

AM3.4 Penalties for second offences of any type.

Second
Offence

Misconduct

Breach of
assessment rules

Poor practice in
attribution

Presentational
errors

Where both first and
second offence marks
are outright fails
because of content
affected by misconduct
– recommendation to
the Academic

Subsequent
breaches of
assessment rules
will be treated as a
repeated breach
and will therefore

Formal Warning of
expulsion if further
offences.
Penalties from the
‘first offence’ menu
may be applied if
offence appear to

Feedback warning
with or without a
marks deduction.

20

Misconduct
Disciplinary Procedure
under Regulation 7.
(See AM5)

be capped at a
represent ‘poor
compensatable fail. practice’.

AM3.5 Disciplinary offences
Disciplinary offences

AM3.6

As disciplinary offences do not relate to an assessment mark of the
student, no marks cap may be applied. Where a panel finds that a
student has committed a disciplinary offence, the panel refers to
Regulation 7 Disciplinary Procedure detailed in AM5.

Corrective pedagogic requirements

The following measures can be taken regardless of the level of culpability, as corrective pedagogic
requirements. Their completion can be set as a requirement for progression to the next stage of
study or for completion of the award:
●
●
●
●
●
●

Required to retake academic integrity tutorial
Required to undertake Turnitin training
Required to consult referencing guidance at york.ac.uk/integrity
Required to resubmit corrected work to module leader
Required to resubmit corrected work to StAMP Chair
Required to meet with Learning Enhancement Team to discuss the work

AM3.7 Mitigation of penalties in light of compelling personal
circumstances
Once the StAMP Investigatory Panel has decided that, on the balance of probabilities, academic
misconduct has occurred, the StAMP Investigatory Panel will agree a penalty in accordance with the
tables in Section 3 of the Academic Misconduct Policy. In deciding on a penalty, the StAMP
Investigatory Panel may take into consideration other factors which, whilst not providing a defence
for the academic misconduct offence, might provide mitigation when considering the penalty. If the
StAMP Investigatory Panel agrees that there are mitigating circumstances that might be relevant to
an academic misconduct offence, then they can consider, if appropriate, the award of a lesser
penalty than the one indicated by the tables in Section 3.
NB. whilst the StAMP Investigatory Panel will take such factors into consideration, the existence of
mitigating circumstances will not necessarily yield a lesser penalty. In coming to their decision, the
StAMP Investigatory Panel will consider all the circumstances, including the seriousness of the
offence.

21

AM3.7.1 Circumstances that may be considered
Exceptional circumstances, as defined by the Exceptional Circumstances affecting Assessment
Policy, are not normally relevant to consideration of whether or not an offence has been committed.
However, there are some limited circumstances in which they may be taken into account as a
mitigation when considering the penalty. These are:
i.

The personal circumstances were of such severity that their impact on the student's
judgement at the time that the academic misconduct offence occurred makes it appropriate,
in the opinion of the Panel, to impose a less serious penalty by reason of those
circumstances.

ii.

A specific disability, or other chronic condition, which clearly impacted the student’s
judgement, or their capacity to comply with academic standards. This may be taken into
account where, through no fault of the student, such a disability has not been accounted for
through a reasonable adjustment or where that adjustment was not made in time for the
assessment. If the specific disability, or its impact, has not been declared to the University,
and hence is not addressed in a university Student Support Plan (SSP), a compelling, and
evidenced, explanation for this will need to be provided.

In i. and ii. above, compelling evidence will need to be provided. That evidence must show that the
student's circumstances were sufficiently significant that it would be, in the opinion of the panel,
inappropriate to impose the penalty which would otherwise be indicated by the tables in Section 3.
The student will be encouraged to disclose any such mitigating circumstances, and their impact, as
part of their statement in response to the StAMP Investigatory Panel Chair, at the point at which the
StAMP Investigatory Panel has decided that there is a case to answer.

AM3.7.2 Consideration of mitigation of penalties in light of compelling personal
circumstances
In order to consider special mitigation in cases of academic misconduct, a Penalty Mitigation Panel
(PMP) will be convened (via email) to consider any changes to the penalty in such circumstances.
This group is composed of the Investigatory Panel chair for the case, the Chair of the SCA (or
delegate) and a nominated member of the Special Cases Committee. This brings together the
required expertise from SCA and Special Cases Committee as well as specific knowledge of the case
from the Investigatory Panel chair. The Deputy Director of Student Services and the Secretary of the
SCA will be in attendance. The process will be:
a. Investigatory Panel makes a decision as normal on the penalty without consideration of any
mitigating circumstances.
b. If the Investigatory Panel believes there are mitigating circumstances that they believe might
be sufficiently serious to pass the threshold, the academic misconduct administrator will
pass the material on to the Penalty Mitigation Panel (PMP).
c. The PMP will consider whether or not the penalty should be adjusted.
d. The PMP chair will inform the Investigatory Panel and the student of the outcome.

22

AM3.8 Guidance on the extent of misconduct for StAMP
Investigatory Panel decision making
AM3.8.1 What is meant by the ‘general approach’ to the assessment task?
Problems with the general approach to the assessment task may be indicated by numerous
sentences of unattributed source material being found throughout the assignment. Work falling into
the serious category may, in the view of the StAMP Investigatory Panel, follow a pattern that
suggests an intention to deceive as opposed to errors in referencing or presentation that could
reasonably be attributed to misunderstanding. Seriousness and intention is a matter of judgement
for the StAMP Investigatory Panel and it is not the purpose of the policy and procedures to set rigid
benchmarks indicating X paragraphs/ X percent of the overall assignment has to be copied for it to
count as serious academic misconduct, nor to suggest that a StAMP Investigatory Panel has to
believe the plagiarism is deliberate in order to reach a judgement that the plagiarism is serious. The
StAMP Investigatory Panel is required to act consistently as far as it can in comparing cases across
the cluster in order to establish credibility and ensure equity in student cases.
A finding of a serious offence of collusion would be justified by a high level of duplication in work,
particularly as regards key concepts, arguments or data in the submitted work. As with plagiarism,
the determination of seriousness should not be made based on the total number of duplicate (or
colluded) words, but rather the relative value of the colluded material to the submission relative to
the work of independent academic value.
It is unlikely that any work containing fabricated or false authorship, or exams affected by cheating
where an unfair advantage or intention to gain an unfair advantage can be inferred from the
circumstances, could justify a mark above the pass mark. Where students are found to have
committed fabrication or false authorship, the penalty would normally be a zero in the affected
assessment. For cheating cases StAMPs should refer to the Penalty tables for cheating in section 3.3.

AM3.8.2 What warrants a StAMP Investigatory Panel recommendation for a mark in the
Compensatable Fail (CF) range?
The award of a mark in the compensatable fail range for serious plagiarism requires the student – as
an absolute minimum – to have included a bibliographic entry allowing the marker to identify each
source used, even if the internal citation is not entirely transparent, is absent or the specified
referencing style has not been followed. Where there is no attempt to acknowledge the source or
the referencing is so unsystematic to be ambiguous, then an outright fail mark should be given.
For a Compensatable Fail mark to be justified in the case of collusion there would need at least to be
reason for the student to believe that they were entitled to use the material they presented in the
way they did. This might include unacknowledged interpolation or extrapolation in a case of
fabrication, or work produced as the result of authorized collaboration used in an inappropriate
manner.
Work produced as the result of false authorship, fabrication or cheating will rarely, if ever, warrant a
mark in the compensatable fail range.

23

AM3.8.3 What warrants a StAMP Investigatory Panel recommendation for a mark in the
pass to 59 range?
The phrase ‘repeated minor errors or inconsistencies in referencing or bibliographic accuracy’ refers
to assessed work where the student consistently fails to include page references for direct
quotations (where house style would suggest that these should be included), has included the
secondary references from primary sources in such a way as to make the extent of their own
scholarship unclear, has cited a source within the text that does not appear in the reference list, or
does not follow the specified referencing system. The extent to which this is a feature of the
assessment and should affect the mark is a matter of academic judgement. However, the principle is
that students should not be permitted to score above 59 if ‘sloppy referencing’ is a feature of their
work.
The phrase ‘inaccurate quotation’ refers to the apparent use of direct quotation, but where
quotation marks may be missing, the text of the quotation is incorrectly copied, page references in
citations are missing or the quotation has been misattributed.
Marks caps of 59 will rarely be appropriate in cases of collusion, fabrication, false authorship or
cheating.

AM3.8.4 When is detailed and specific feedback warranted rather than initiating the
StAMP procedures?
The phrase ‘isolated minor referencing/ bibliographic errors’ refers to errors that appear to be the
result of oversight e.g. inaccurate or missing dates, the failure to include a page reference in a
citation or footnote in a work otherwise correctly referenced or a small error in the reference list.
These errors should be taken into account when marking and be mentioned in written feedback. A
marks reduction is not mandatory but where it is appropriate to reduce marks for errors then this
should be a specific feature of the feedback.

AM3.9 Academic misconduct alleged after the examination has
taken place
If academic misconduct is alleged or suspected after the examination has taken place, but before the
qualification has been awarded or conferred, the award or conferment process shall be suspended
pending the outcome of an investigation conducted in accordance with this policy. If the StAMP
investigatory panel decides that the academic misconduct warrants it, it may decide that a reexamination of the student is necessary. A re-examination under these circumstances shall be
subject to the approval of Special Cases Committee.
If academic misconduct is alleged or suspected after the degree has been conferred, the Senate shall
determine the procedures to be followed.

24

AM4. Composition, responsibilities and procedures relating
to StAMP Investigatory Panels5
AM4.1 Roles and responsibilities
AM4.1.1 Reporting marker
The reporting marker plays an important role in initiating the investigation and must provide the
module coordinator/StAMP Investigatory Panel with a clear rationale and evidence for their
suspicions that an offence has been committed. The marker should fill out the Report of Suspected
Academic Misconduct template and submit it to the module co-ordinator. The marker may
informally consult with the module co-ordinator to discuss a suspected case of academic misconduct
prior to submitting their formal suspicions to the Academic Misconduct Administrator.

AM4.1.2 Module co-ordinator
The module co-ordinator may carry out an informal consideration of a marker’s suspicion of
academic misconduct. Once grounds for case have been confirmed, the module co-ordinator should
receive a Report of Suspected Academic Misconduct template from the marker and pass this on to
the departmental administrator who will subsequently de-anonymise the work, check and complete
Report of Suspected Academic Misconduct template and inform academic-misconduct@york.ac.uk.

AM4.1.3 StAMP Investigatory Panel member
Each department will have nominated StAMP members whose responsibility it is to represent the
department on each case. These StAMP members are responsible for providing their academic
judgement on the case and contributing to the decision of the offence and penalty in line with the
policy in a timely manner.

AM4.1.4 StAMP Investigatory Panel Chair & Chairing department
Each panel will be chaired by a StAMP member from the reporting department, they act as the point
of contact for students. The StAMP Investigatory Panel Chair is responsible for moving the case
forward and communicating with the student, department and academic-misconduct@york.ac.uk.
The Chair is responsible to ensure the proper procedures are followed and the policy is applied
appropriately. They may consult with the SCA member when necessary to clarify points of policy and
also may consult with specialist staff where necessary (see 2.1.6)
The Chairing department is required to supply administrative support for any meetings that are
called to consider cases that are judged, after the initial consideration, to be serious. Meetings must
be minuted and these minutes must be circulated amongst the investigating panel, including the SCA
contact. The department that chairs the StAMP Investigatory Panel is responsible for sending out
letters/emails to students and for concluding the procedures, using standard template letters and
forms. Departmental administrative resources are also expected to be used for this work.

5

These are the recommended procedures however is should be noted that departmental practices may differ
for reporting practices

25

AM4.1.5 SCA member
The SCA member provides oversight over the process to ensure that the proper procedures are
followed and the policy is applied appropriately. In order to do this, the SCA member must monitor
discussions in the case and review the penalty. The SCA member does not play a role in the decision,
as long as it is in line with policy. The SCA member is not required to attend hearings. SCA members
are involved in the consideration of policy changes and the review of academic misconduct
processes, procedures and data, and thus may support StAMP training.

AM4.1.6 SCA secretary
As the Academic Misconduct Policy is the responsibility of SCA, the SCA secretary may be called
upon by the SCA member for assistance with interpretation of the policy. The Secretary is also
responsible for the organisation of StAMP training, consultation and policy updates. The SCA
secretary will also organise the annual case review of academic misconduct cases and assist in
producing the annual report of academic misconduct data to SCA and key findings to departments.

AM4.1.7 Academic Misconduct Administrator (AMA)
The Academic Misconduct Administrator (AMA) acts as the central point of contact at the University
for setting up StAMP Investigatory Panels and tracking the progress of each case. It is the AMA’s role
to maintain records, provide and update templates for cases, and check that the relevant documents
have been provided to everyone who needs them. They may also alert the SCA member or a StAMP
Investigatory Panel Chair if a case has not progressed.

AM4.2 School/Departmental and unit responsibilities to provide
staff to a StAMP
Each school/department (and centre/unit wherever possible), should nominate at least three
members of academic staff to act as their representatives on the StAMP relevant to their
programmes of study. Supplementary programmes will normally be members of the StAMP
appropriate to the department to which they are affiliated or to the most relevant discipline to the
award in question.

AM4.3 Minimum numbers needed for a StAMP Investigatory Panel
to be quorate
A StAMP Investigatory Panel is quorate with 3 members for decision-making, including the Chair,
who is drawn from the department or unit reporting the academic misconduct. If a member of the
StAMP panel has not responded within a reasonable time to communications from the Chair, and
the Chair agrees a majority decision with one member of the investigatory panel, the Chair is
permitted to make a majority decision to expedite the case. A departmental representative should
not serve on the StAMP Investigatory Panel if the case of a personal supervisee is being considered
or there is an obvious conflict of interest. At least two members of the StAMP Investigatory Panel,
including the chair, are to be present if a student is interviewed.

AM4.4 How a StAMP Investigatory Panel considers cases
The Chair circulates material relevant to the case(s) to the other members of the StAMP
Investigatory Panel for their initial decisions. This is usually done electronically at the discretion of

26

the StAMP Investigatory Panel members. Where there is electronic sharing of documentation and
email discussion the SCA contact must be included.

AM4.5 Concluding the procedures
All decisions made by the Investigatory Panels of each StAMP, must be recorded by the Chair of the
relevant case(s) in the form designed for this purpose. The SCA representative on each case must be
informed of the decision and agree that they are fair. Minutes of meetings of the Investigatory
Panels should be forwarded to academic-misconduct@york.ac.uk for retention against the student
record. Investigatory Panels can ask to see minutes of previous meetings as an aid to their decisionmaking and to support consistency in their judgements.
Where the Investigatory Panel makes a decision regarding academic misconduct, a copy of the
decision is also forwarded to the Chair of Board of Examiners in the reporting department/centre,
and to the module co-ordinator and the departmental administrator in the student’s department.
Where the Investigatory Panel makes a decision regarding a disciplinary offence a copy of the
decision is also forwarded to the student’s Head of Department or Centre or Chair of Board of
Examiners.

AM4.6 Sample documents
Examples of letters to students and a report template have been developed to ensure that such
letters cover all necessary points. Retention of such letters is particularly important if academic
misconduct is found in pieces of work subsequently submitted by students. These letters can be
accessed through the StAMP folder in the Google drive to which all StAMP members have access.

AM5 Academic Misconduct Disciplinary Procedure
AM5.1 Disciplinary Action for Repeat, Serious and Disciplinary Offences
Academic Misconduct is identified as an Act of Misconduct in 7.2.1(j) in Regulation 7. Disciplinary
offences and second offences of a serious nature (capped at a non-compensatable fail) are therefore
dealt with under the scope and principles established in Regulation 7 following an appropriate
investigation as detailed in this section (AM5). These offences can be punished by a fine, or a
temporary or permanent exclusion. Among the actions that could be pursued under the disciplinary
procedure is the offence of fraud, deception or dishonesty towards the University, its members or
visitors. Disciplinary offences 6, 7 and 8 would constitute such behaviour. In the event that
misconduct is discovered or suspected subsequent to the award of a degree, or other award,
Ordinance 7 applies.

AM5.2 Procedure for considering Academic Misconduct under Regulation 7.
All disciplinary offences and assessment offences are first considered by the StAMP investigatory
panel in line with AM2. The Academic Misconduct procedures. If a second assessment offence of the
same type is capped at a non-compensatable mark (UG29/PGT39), this is referred to to the
procedures in AM5.2.1c.i.. If the StAMP investigatory panel agrees there is a case to answer that the
student has committed a disciplinary offence on the balance of probabilities - this goes straight to
the procedure in AM5.2.1.II.c. ii.. The Academic Misconduct Administrator is responsible for
referring the cases to Regulation 7 Disciplinary Procedure at Level 2 (Reg 7.2.5).

27

AM5.2.1 Procedure, Outcomes and Sanctions
I.

Academic Misconduct Administrator informs Secretary of SCA of the commencement of the
disciplinary procedures.

II.

Senior member of SAAA or SLAW is assigned as the Disciplinary Manager for the case, they
will:
a. work with the investigating officer who is the SCA Secretary or delegate thereof
(investigating officer will assist in collating documents for consideration of the
panel);
b. decide whether or not there is case to answer, which triggers a Level 2 disciplinary
panel;
c. form a disciplinary panel with 3 senior members of the university. This should
include:
i.
ii.

iii.

the Head of Department of the student under investigation - or delegate
thereof,
a suitable Academic staff member (e.g. SCA, Special Cases or Ethics
Committee members but not involved in the StAMP cases considered for the
offence) and
a member of Student and Academic Services.

In the event any of these are unavailable a suitable delegate may be approved by the
Disciplinary Manager.
d. invite the student to make a written submission and present any evidence and invite
them to the hearing
e. explain to the student what other evidence the panel will be considering (the
evidence from StAMP panel) in line with the Principles of Regulation 7.3.
f.

III.

ensure the panel meets to discuss and reaches a decision within the parameters of
Regulation 7.

Outcome of the panel and sanctions: As Academic Misconduct is considered a Level 2
offence under Regulation 7 - the panel may consider all the sanctions under 7.4.2 up to and
including suspension or expulsion.

AM5.4 Fitness to Practice
Where an academic misconduct offence has been established and this raises concerns about a
student’s fitness to practise, or if other disciplinary offences are related to the incident of
misconduct, then the University’s Fitness to Practise or Disciplinary procedures should also be
consulted and invoked where necessary.

28

AM6. Appeals
AM6.1 Grounds for appeal
When a student is informed of the outcome of the StAMP Investigatory Panel consideration of their
case they must be advised that they have a right to appeal using the forms and guidance at on this
webpage.
Students may only appeal against decisions of a Standing Committee on Academic Misconduct
Investigatory Panel on the grounds that:
i.
ii.
iii.
iv.
v.

The Academic Misconduct procedures were not followed properly;
The StAMP Investigatory Panel reached a decision that was not reasonable in all the
circumstances;
New evidence is available which could not reasonably have been brought to the attention of
the StAMP Investigatory Panel at the time of its investigation;
There was bias or reasonable perception of bias during the academic misconduct process;
The penalty imposed by the StAMP Investigatory Panel was disproportionate or not
permitted under the Academic Misconduct procedures.

Students may not appeal against matters of academic judgement in relation to academic misconduct
- see section AM1.3.2 for further information.

AM6.2 The right for the SCA contact to instigate a Special Cases
Committee process
A hearing will always take place if recommended by the SCA contact advising the StAMP
investigatory panel on an investigation. The SCA contact will not normally be a member of any Board
of Studies, Graduate School Board or department represented on the StAMP investigatory panel.

AM6.3 The Appeal Process
Any student who decides to appeal the outcome of the StAMP investigation will be required to
follow the University's Student Academic Appeals Procedure and, if they are dissatisfied at the end
of that process, they may make a complaint to the Office for the Independent Adjudicator for Higher
Education.

29

AM Guidance
AM7. General advice and training for students
AM7.1 Establishing understanding
AM7.1.1 Induction, compulsory Academic Integrity Tutorial and handbook entries
It is compulsory for all students to complete the Academic Integrity Tutorial on the Yorkshare VLE
(virtual learning environment) in order to progress to the next stage of their programme or to
receive their award, whichever occurs first. It is recommended that students are required to
complete this tutorial successfully during the first term of their programme of study, particularly
those on postgraduate programmes. Students must complete the Academic Integrity Tutorial for
each programme of study they undertake.
The Academic Integrity Tutorial advises all new students of the various forms of academic
misconduct and warns them of the consequences of committing an offence. It is written in clear and
accessible language and cross references to the University Referencing Style Guides with examples
of appropriate referencing and this requirement should be clearly noted in the students handbook in
addition to any department specific guidance if distinct from the information contained in the
Academic Integrity Tutorial.
It is good practice to remind students of the expectations regarding academic integrity, and any
specific instructions e.g. in relation to group-work, help from family members or what materials can
be taken into a closed examination, when they are approaching assessments, so as to leave no room
for doubt about their familiarity with the University’s requirements.

AM7.1.2 Induction of postgraduate taught students
Taught postgraduate students may undertake significant components of assessment relatively early
in their programme. Programme organisers and supervisors must ensure that students are made
aware of the nature of academic misconduct in all its forms prior to any assessment or preparation
by the student of work for assessment. Programme organisers and supervisors should pay particular
attention to the needs of students who may be studying in the UK for the first time.

AM7.1.3 Conventions of academic writing
Departments must advise students of the rationale and procedures for the full and accurate
acknowledgment of sources in their academic writing (essays, projects, etc.). In particular,
departments must advise students on the correct method for citing sources from the Internet for the
specific discipline, advice at the website.
Students must be informed of the level of acknowledgment appropriate to particular forms of
assessment and of the conventions of academic writing, for example, the appropriate use of
quotation marks, footnotes and bibliographies, and the dangers of ‘near-paraphrasing’.

30

AM7.1.4 Specific guidance to students by discipline
Programme and module organisers should ensure that students receive subject, or discipline,
specific advice that may not be covered in generic academic integrity guides published by the
University e.g. copying code, equations, stylistic aspects of performance.
Where relevant, students must be warned that some common workplace practices (e.g. ‘cutting and
pasting’ unacknowledged material into technical specifications or briefing documents) constitute
plagiarism in the context of academic assessment. Similarly, students should be made aware that
sharing conventions on social media are different to those in academic work.

AM7.2 Specific instructions to students in relation to working in
groups
Departments should ensure that students undertaking group work receive clear guidance on the
boundary between legitimate collaboration and misconduct involving collusion. Where academic
staff use module specific forms of collaboration and group working in support of the learning
outcomes of their module it is their responsibility to clearly define what legitimate collaborative
learning is in the context of the module or assessment. This should be reinforced regularly
throughout the module.

AM7.3 Distance learning programmes
Departments offering distance-learning programmes should ensure that issues of academic
misconduct are brought to the attention of students studying on these programmes at an early
stage, with regular reminders provided over the course of the programme. It is recommended that
the usual departmental procedures for delivering information about academic misconduct issues are
reviewed regularly in the light of the particular features of this type of study.

AM7.4 Practical and research projects
Students engaged in practical, laboratory work and/or empirical research projects should be
required to maintain appropriate, verifiable records of progress (e.g. a bound lab book), which a
party other than the student can verify. These records should be able to be made available at any
point for verification.
Departments are required to determine what constitutes verifiable, sustainable and authentic data
in their particular discipline.

AM7.5 Use of unauthorised third-party support, particularly custom
assignment writing services
Students should be aware of the seriousness with which the University views the use of
unauthorized third-party support with their assignments. It should be highlighted that from a
learning perspective, unauthorised support may hinder students’ learning progress and that they
might become increasingly dependent on help. Using unauthorised support is taken extremely
seriously by the University and could result in expulsion. In particular it should be stressed that the
use of custom assignment writing services is especially hazardous as they prey on vulnerable
students to make poor ethical choices and the guarantees of the sites cannot be trusted.

31

AM8. General advice to departments and examiners
AM8.1 Establishing understanding
AM8.1.1 Induction
Departments and units are required to advise all academic and Graduate Teaching Assistant (GTA)
appointments about the various forms of academic misconduct that are offences under the
University of York policy, procedures and guidelines. Responsibilities of module tutors and
assessment designers and examiners must be made clear.
There should be clear advice on the forms of academic misconduct, written in clear and accessible
language and with examples appropriate to the department, available to all staff.

AM8.1.2 Conventions of academic writing and marking
Departments and units are required to advise, guide and support all academic and GTA staff involved
in teaching and assessment in the conventions of academic writing in operation in the department.
This should cover the rationale and format of the full and accurate acknowledgment of sources in
their academic writing (essays, projects, etc.). Programme organisers should not assume that
incoming staff and GTAs are aware of the academic writing and referencing conventions in use, or
their responsibilities as module tutors in respect to the handling of academic misconduct.

AM8.2 Probationary modules
Full details of the support and development of students who are found to have plagiarised and/or
colluded in probationary modules should be supplied to academic-misconduct@york.ac.uk.

AM8.3 Grade descriptors
It is good practice to ensure that grade descriptors contain clear statements regarding academic
integrity measures, especially in relation to referencing of sources. Departments can, if they prefer,
add a general statement appended to their grade descriptors that indicates to students that
notwithstanding the general qualities of the work, a mark may be awarded outside of the grade
band for poor or insufficient acknowledgement of sources. A statement to this effect is also included
in the University’s Guide to Assessment.

AM8.4 Detection
It is important that markers are vigilant for academic misconduct in all forms of assessment. Markers
are encouraged to carry out random checks on assessed work using internet search engines (such as
Advanced Google Search or Google Books) or to employ text matching software such as SafeAssign
or Turnitin (see guidance on Yorkshare for the appropriate use of SafeAssign and Turnitin). This
advice applies equally to formative and summative work.

AM8.5 Appropriate support for students in open assessments
Departments should discuss and agree conventions for the type and extent of formative comments
made on students’ work, especially where that same piece of work will subsequently be submitted

32

for summative assessment. Staff should be aware that where they have made extensive improving
comments and/or amendments directly to the text of formative work this can represent an unfair
advantage to students in directly improving their submission. These agreed conventions should be
regularly revisited and staff reminded of the departmental conventions re formative feedback and
the boundary between feedback and direct improvements that can be incorporated by students in
summative work, as opposed to developmental comments on the work.

AM8.6 Feedback from StAMP members to their departments
The intention of the StAMP system is to encourage intra- and inter-departmental sharing of good
practice, expertise and pedagogical approaches to the development of high standards of academic
integrity. StAMP representatives are encouraged to report back on at least an annual basis to their
Board of Studies comparing the types of cases their own department refers to Investigatory Panels
to other departments in their cluster i.e. not revealing the names of individual students but noting if
there are discernible patterns emerging, and recommending changes in practice that would help
avoid the common errors and reportable offences.

AM8.7 Assessment Design to mitigate risks of misconduct
Departments can mitigate the risks of misconduct through measures to; use a variety of assessment
types; regularly revise assignment questions; and identify students in need or support. An overall
effort to improve assessment design can help to not only improve the integrity of the assessment
process but also improve student engagement and attainment. If departments wish to discuss
assessment design, they can contact the Learning Enhancement Team (cecilia.lowe@york.ac.uk).

33

AM Appendix 1: Flowchart of procedure academic misconduct cases - staff Eaccessible Text Version

34

AM Appendix 2: Flowchart of procedure academic misconduct cases - student
E-accessible Text Version

35

AM Appendix 3: Documenting and considering evidence of false authorship
As with plagiarism, the identification of false authorship starts with an academic judgement. One of
the difficulties of identifying this offence is that it will require solid evidence that an act of
commission and incorporation has taken place. While at first the suspicion may appear as a gut
feeling, the marker must provide specific evidence of their suspicion of false authorship, this may
include a combination of the following features:
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

Identifiable markers: In certain cases the student may not remove features which identify
another author in the assignment, such as the name of a company.
Document properties: Check properties of the document/file for any unusual names, dates,
editing times.
Level of assignment: A suspiciously good assignment which stands out from the cohort or
from previous work submitted by the student (harder to tell with anonymous assignments).
Language level: High level of language usage in writing which stands out in a cohort/level of
study.
Unusual/inappropriate references: Reference to texts/resources which have not been
covered in the course, or are unrelated/inappropriate for the assignment.
Omission of core texts or methods: The omission of core texts from the reference list or
methods used which were not taught on the module.
Off topic: An intelligent attempt at the assignment but off topic and with references to a
wide range of unrelated work or methods which are tenuously linked to the assignment.
Unusual referencing style or formatting: Use of the wrong referencing style or unusual
formatting of the assignment.
Turnitin Originality Check : Turnitin originality check does not help in identifying
assignments which contain false authorship.
AI detection software: AI detection software may not accurately detect false authorship,
please contact SCA@york.ac.uk for the latest guidance on AI detection and do not run
student work through freely available AI detectors online.

36

AM Appendix 4: Procedure for Academic Misconduct in Low-credit assessment
1. Stage 0 and 1 modules, and probationary modules: Any minor academic misconduct on these
modules is considered probationary and therefore should be dealt with by the department and
treated as a learning opportunity for the students (unless the department has opted out of the
module being considered probationary). Academic misconduct can result from misunderstanding the
requirements of academic integrity with respect to assessed work, and should be addressed by indepth feedback on the precise aspects that were found to be problematic – although a mark penalty
may also be appropriate, depending on the severity of the offence.
2. Stage 2 and above: Minor academic misconduct in low-credit assessments may be dealt with by the
department. A departmental record of the decision must be kept and students must be informed of
their right to the case being considered by StAMP Investigatory Panel in accordance with the full
procedure.
3. Considering academic misconduct in Low Credit assessments: Departments must follow the
following procedure for considering academic misconduct of low-credit assessment:
a. Marker informally raises the offence with the module leader or suitable alternative (such as
practical course organiser).
b. Module leader (or alternative) and marker agree on whether academic misconduct has been
committed and of what level (see AM3.2.);
c. No misconduct: Marker provides appropriate feedback about the aspects of the work that were
viewed as problematic, with the aim of helping the student to better understand the
requirements of academic integrity and good academic practice.
d. Second offence check: If academic misconduct is confirmed, the module leader checks
departmental record to see whether this is a second offence - if so, the case must be dealt with
by a full StAMP process. Second and subsequent offences will have great consequences and this
should be highlighted to students.
e. Minor Misconduct Offences: If it is the student’s first offence, the marker and module leader
agree an appropriate penalty with advice from StAMP member. This must be consistent with
those listed in the penalty tables in the Academic Misconduct Policy (Section 3).
f. Serious Misconduct Offences: Any cases in which there is an allegation of a significant level of
cheating, fabrication or false authorship should be dealt with by a full StAMP process.
g. Departmental StAMP member informed of the decision, offers further advice if necessary.
h. Administrator records outcome of cases under student’s examination number in confidential
folder.
i. The departmental record is reviewed annually in coordination with SCA to ensure equity of
approach in minor cases.
Informing the student: The student can be notified informally by the marker in the course of
discussion. In all cases, however, a formal email to the student and administrator must follow
that includes information about:

37

● Right to full StAMP consideration of case: If low-credit assessments are dealt with by the
department, students retain the right to have the case reconsidered by means of a full StAMP
procedure. It is important students are clearly informed of this. Any subsequent appeal of the
StAMP’s determination will be dealt with via the regular appeals process.
● Right to advice and support: Students must be as informed of their right to advice and support

(e.g. from their supervisor, YUSU/GSA or other welfare support services) in the same way as
students who experience the full StAMP process.

38
