Page 1 of 17

ACADEMIC INTEGRITY POLICY
Policy Sponsor:

Provost and Vice-President
(Academic)

First Approved: 23 JULY 2020

Primary Contact:

University Registrar

Last Updated: 17 DECEMBER 2024

Approved by:

Senate

Review Scheduled:

1. PURPOSE
The integrity of the degrees conferred by Brandon University, the quality of relationships between
students, faculty members, staff, and administration, and the reputation of the institution depend
upon all members of the community respecting and upholding the fundamental values of honesty,
trust, fairness, respect, responsibility, and courage (ICAI, 2014).
This particular policy is designed for students to ensure that the University’s standards are upheld in
a fair and transparent fashion. Students are responsible for the entire content and form of their
work at Brandon University. Nothing in this policy is intended to prohibit students from developing
their academic skills through the exchange of ideas and the utilization of resources available at the
University to support learning (e.g., Academic Skills Centre). Students who are in doubt as to what
constitutes a departure from academic integrity in a particular instance should consult their course
instructor.

2. SCOPE
It is expected that students, faculty members, staff, and administration at Brandon University, as
members of an intellectual community, will adhere to these ethical values in all activities related to
learning, teaching, research and service. Any action that contravenes this standard, including
misrepresentation, falsification or deception, undermines the intention and worth of scholarly work
and violates the fundamental academic rights of members of our community.
In administration of this policy, faculty members, staff, and administration are subject to Brandon
University Board of Governors By-law No. 10 – Conflict of Interest.

This document is available in PDF format on the Brandon University website. This document can be
obtained in alternative formats from the Office of the President, Room 116 Clark Hall.

Page 2 of 17

3. DEFINITIONS
Academic Integrity: A commitment, even in the face of adversity, to six fundamental values in all
University activities and relationships: honesty, trust, fairness, respect, responsibility, and courage
(adapted from the International Center for Academic Integrity’s definition).
Academic Integrity Committee: A standing committee of the Brandon University Senate that is
responsible for reviewing and making decisions on appeals related to departures from academic
integrity.
Artificial Intelligence (AI): Technology that enables computers and machines to simulate human
learning, comprehension, problem solving, decision making, creativity and autonomy (Stryker &
Kavakoglu, 2024). It encompasses generative AI, which includes large language models and other
technologies that enable generation of text, visuals, and creative works (any medium).
BU Academic Integrity Repository: Central, electronic, institutional repository of departures from
academic integrity that includes the student’s BU ID, name, date of incident, date of incident report,
course in which incident occurred (if course-based), nature of incident, and remedy/sanction
applied. The repository is maintained by the Registrar’s Office. Access to information in the
repository is restricted to staff in the Registrar’s Office and staff in the individual Faculty/School
Dean’s Offices.
Dean: Normally, the Dean of an academic Faculty/School. In the event that a suspected departure
from academic dishonesty is not related to a course/activity within an academic Faculty/School,
“Dean” should be understood to refer to the senior manager of the unit responsible for the
academic work/activity in which the alleged departure from academic honesty occurred.
Department Chair/ Program Coordinator: Normally, the Chair/Coordinator of an academic
department/program. In the event that an alleged departure from academic integrity is not related
to a course, “Department Chair/Program Coordinator” should be understood to refer to the
individual to whom the person reporting the alleged departure from academic integrity reports.
Departure from Academic Integrity: A failure to uphold any of the six fundamental values of
academic integrity (honesty, trust, fairness, respect, responsibility and courage) in a University
activity and/or relationship (adapted from the International Center for Academic Integrity’s
definition).
Editor/Author: An individual, tool/technology, or service (paid or unpaid), other than the instructor
or supervisory committee, who authors, manipulates, revises, corrects, or alters a student’s work.

This document is available in PDF format on the Brandon University website. This document can be
obtained in alternative formats from the Office of the President, Room 116 Clark Hall.

Page 3 of 17

Instructor: Normally, the instructor(s) of a course offered by an academic department. In the event
that an alleged departure from academic integrity is not related to a course, “instructor” should be
understood to refer to the individual(s) who was/were supervising and/or otherwise responsible for
the academic work/activity with regard to which the alleged incident occurred.
“In Writing”: Unless specified otherwise in the body of this policy, Brandon University email is
considered official written communication.
President: Normally, the President & Vice-Chancellor of Brandon University. If the President is
unable to serve in the capacity specified (such as if the President is the instructor of a course in
which a student is suspected from having departed from academic integrity), the Vice-President
(Academic & Provost) shall serve as designate.
Policy: means the Academic Integrity Policy
Student: Includes persons who meet any of the following criteria:
a. Person who has submitted an application for admission to the University;
b. Person enrolled either full-time or part-time in classes, including when on placements that are
part of their academic program;
c. Person who is enrolled in a program but not currently registered in classes;
d. Person on an exchange program that is coordinated by Brandon University at another university.
University: means Brandon University

4. POLICY
4.1. Integrity in Action
4.1.1. Honesty
Honesty involves adhering to the facts and engaging in straightforward behaviour
(Honesty, n.d.). In the University community, honesty involves, but is not limited to, the
following:
•
•
•

Acknowledging correctly, in academic work, the sources from which ideas have been
taken and/or reproduced
Doing one’s own work on assignments, activities, and examinations
Presenting one’s own true, accurate, official documents, including identification,
transcripts, etc., when required

4.1.2. Trust
Trust is the “assured reliance on the character, ability, strength, or truth of someone…”
(Trust, n.d.). “Trust enables us to collaborate, to share information, and to circulate new
This document is available in PDF format on the Brandon University website. This document can be
obtained in alternative formats from the Office of the President, Room 116 Clark Hall.

Page 4 of 17

ideas freely, without fear that our work will be stolen…or our reputations diminished.
Trust is essential so that those outside academic communities can believe in the value
and meaning of scholarly research, teaching, and degrees” (ICAI, 2014). In the University
community, trust involves, but is not limited to, the following:
•
•
•

Doing what one says one will do when one has promised to do it
Communicating clearly and openly with instructors, students, and staff
Consistently obeying the law and following the University’s policies and procedures

4.1.3. Fairness
Fairness is being impartial and “free from self-interest, prejudice, or favoritism”
(Fairness, n.d.). In the University community, fairness involves, but is not limited to, the
following:
•
•
•
•

Doing one’s own work on assignments, activities, and examinations
Preparing for and participating fully in assigned group academic activities
Acknowledging correctly, in academic work, the sources from which ideas have been
taken and/or reproduced
Informing appropriate University community members if other students have
departed from academic integrity

4.1.4. Respect
Respect is the “high or special regard” (Respect, n.d.) due oneself and each member of
the University community. Within the University community, respect involves, but is not
limited to, the following:
•
•
•

Actively engaging the perspectives of others with an open, learning attitude
Using the ideas of others to modify one’s own viewpoints and publicly
acknowledging the sources of those ideas
Preparing for and participating actively in all academic activities

4.1.5. Responsibility
Responsibility is being accountable for one’s own actions and obligations (Responsibility,
n.d.). In the University community, responsibility involves, but is not limited to, the
following:
•
•
•

Acknowledging one’s mistakes and accepting appropriate consequences
Acknowledging that community members learn values and behaviour from one
another and committing to serve as a positive role model for peers and other
members of the University community
Asking instructors for clarification if it is unclear whether certain actions might
depart from academic integrity

This document is available in PDF format on the Brandon University website. This document can be
obtained in alternative formats from the Office of the President, Room 116 Clark Hall.

Page 5 of 17

4.1.6. Courage
“Courage is the capacity to act in accordance with one’s values despite fear” (ICAI,
2014). In the University community, courage involves, but is not limited to, the following:
•
•

Refusing to participate in any action that would depart from these values, even in
the face of social or other pressure
Informing appropriate University community members if other students have
departed from academic integrity

4.2. Statement on Artificial Intelligence (AI)
Artificial intelligence (AI) is emerging technology with many promising uses. In certain contexts
within the University, however, its use is inappropriate and can prevent important learning.
Due to the unique nature of the varied courses and academic activities that occur at Brandon
University, no single position on AI use will be appropriate for all courses/activities. The
instructor must outline clearly in writing to all students at the beginning of the course/activity
(ideally on the course outline) the ways in which AI use is both permitted and restricted for
their course/activity.
4.3. Departures from Academic Integrity
4.3.1. Plagiarism
Representation of thoughts, writing/creative work, or inventions derived from another
source as one’s own. In the University community, plagiarism includes, but is not limited
to the following:
•
•
•

Work which is submitted or presented in partial fulfilment of course/degree
requirements as one’s own work that was completed, in whole or in part, by another
individual
Portions of the work extracted from another source without proper and full credit to
the original source (e.g. concepts, sentences, graphics, data, ideas presented through
paraphrase); this could include unauthorized use of AI
The entirety of a work copied from another source

Plagiarism can also include re-using one’s own work without permission, such as
submitting work in one course that has been or is simultaneously being submitted for
credit in another course without the expressed written permission of all instructors
involved. In such cases, the entirety of the work may originate with the student;
nevertheless, plagiarism has occurred. Plagiarism can also include performing the same
musical piece for credit in more than one course without the expressed written
permission of all instructors involved.

This document is available in PDF format on the Brandon University website. This document can be
obtained in alternative formats from the Office of the President, Room 116 Clark Hall.

Page 6 of 17

4.3.2. Cheating
Any dishonest and/or deceptive action carried out as part of a University activity or
within a University relationship. In the University community, cheating includes, but is
not limited to the following:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

•

Using, giving, receiving, or the attempt to use, give or receive unauthorized
information related to an examination in oral, written or other form
Sharing answers or information directly related to the assessment activity when
doing take-home or online assignments, tests or examinations except where the
instructor has authorized collaborative work
Copying an essay, examination, report or like form of evaluation
Allowing another to copy an essay, examination, report or like form of evaluation
Impersonating another person in an examination or test, being knowingly
impersonated by another person in an examination or test, and/or serving as a
confederate in such activities
Buying or otherwise obtaining term papers or assignments for submission as one’s
own
Unauthorized use of an editor
o The instructor should specify the extent of editing that is authorized.
Students should consult with the instructor if they are unsure about what
is/is not allowed.
Giving false reasons for absence (e.g. from an in-class test, final examination,
required classroom activities)

4.3.3. Academic Interference
Any activity that hinders another student from fairly and fully participating in their
educational experience at the University. In the University community, academic
interference includes, but is not limited to the following:
•
•
•

Deliberately blocking or hindering another student’s fair access to University
materials and facilities
Deliberately failing to fulfill one’s obligations or assigned responsibilities as part of an
evaluated group activity or project
Destroying or tampering with another student’s academic work or materials

4.3.4. Falsification
In the University community, falsification includes, but is not limited to the following:
•
•
•
•

Creating fake references
Misrepresenting one’s credentials
Submitting false documents
Tampering with academic records, transcripts or other University documents

This document is available in PDF format on the Brandon University website. This document can be
obtained in alternative formats from the Office of the President, Room 116 Clark Hall.

Page 7 of 17

•

Falsifying documents from outside agencies required by the University (e.g. medical
notes, letters of reference)

4.3.5. Aiding Others to Depart from Academic Integrity
It is a violation to help others or attempt to help others to engage in any of the conduct
described above.
4.4. Suspected Departure from Academic Integrity
4.4.1. Course Withdrawal
The right to withdraw from a course shall be withheld (or, in exceptional circumstances,
revoked) when an instructor suspects a student has engaged in action that departs from
academic integrity. Subsequent to investigation, should the balance of probabilities not
support this suspicion, the student’s right to withdraw will be re-instated and shall apply
retroactively to the date the departure was alleged.
4.4.2. Departures from Academic Integrity Involving Multiple Students and/or Group Work
Complexity is introduced where more than one student is suspected to have been
involved in the same departure from academic integrity with reference to the same
academic activity. In such cases, the instructor should follow the procedures outlined in
Sections 4.4.3. and 4.4.4. of this policy as closely as possible, though it may be necessary
to return to the investigation phase repeatedly as information from different sources
becomes progressively available. In such cases, it may be impossible to adhere to
timelines recommended in this policy; each step of the process should be completed as
expeditiously as possible.
4.4.3. Investigation
Instructors who suspect that a student/students may have engaged in action that
departs from academic integrity will review all available information to determine
whether there are reasonable grounds to accuse the student(s) of having departed from
academic integrity. This may include having a preliminary conversation with the
student(s) about the relevant assignment/ academic activity. During such a conversation,
the instructor must conclude the exploratory discussion immediately should it become
evident that a departure has likely occurred. In such a case, the instructor must inform
the student(s) that they believe a departure from academic integrity has occurred and
that they will be proceeding with the formal process.
Under normal circumstances, this review should be completed within 5 business days of
the instructor becoming aware of the suspected departure from academic integrity.
In the event that an instructor is convinced, on the balance of probabilities, that a
departure from academic integrity has not occurred, the matter is closed. At any later
This document is available in PDF format on the Brandon University website. This document can be
obtained in alternative formats from the Office of the President, Room 116 Clark Hall.

Page 8 of 17

point, should the instructor become aware of information related to the same situation
that causes the instructor to suspect once again that a departure from academic
integrity occurred, the instructor will begin a new investigation in accordance with this
policy.
In the event that investigation leads an instructor to continue to suspect, on the balance
of probabilities, that the student(s) departed from academic integrity, the instructor will
contact the Registrar’s Office in writing to request that the student(s) be prevented from
withdrawing from the course due to a suspected departure from academic integrity. The
instructor will then proceed to Section 4.4.4. of this policy.
Should an investigation into a suspected departure from academic integrity be ongoing
at the deadline to submit final grades for the course, the instructor should submit an
Incomplete grade for the student, to be cleared once the process outlined in this policy
has concluded.
4.4.4. Student Notification and Meeting
In the event that an instructor is convinced, on the balance of probabilities, that the
student(s) departed from academic integrity, the instructor will notify the student(s) in
writing, normally within 2 business days of completing the investigation. Even in cases
where the instructor (or an exam invigilator) caught a student/students in the act of
departing from academic integrity, the instructor will notify the student(s) in writing and
meet with the student(s) as described below.
The notification letter will include the following information:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

A clear identification of the course, assignment, and/or academic activity in which
the suspected departure has occurred;
A clear statement describing the nature of the suspected departure;
A description and/or copy of the evidence supporting the allegation;
An invitation for the student to meet with the instructor;
A link to the Academic Integrity Policy;
An indication that the student may choose to have a representative from BUSU or
other support person present at the meeting;
A deadline of 10 business days for the student to respond; and
An indication that the instructor may choose to have a colleague present at the
meeting.

E-mail to a student’s Brandon University email account is considered official notice in
writing. Should a student fail to respond within 10 business days of the instructor’s
reach-out, the instructor will follow the steps outlined in Section 4.4.5.2 below.

This document is available in PDF format on the Brandon University website. This document can be
obtained in alternative formats from the Office of the President, Room 116 Clark Hall.

Page 9 of 17

The instructor may request the attendance of a colleague (such as the department Chair,
another faculty member of the department in which the course is offered, an
administrative staff member in the Faculty/School, etc.) at meetings with students
regarding alleged departures from academic integrity.
Normally, the meeting should occur within 10 business days of the instructor notifying
the student(s) of the alleged departure. During the meeting, the instructor should
review with the student(s) the evidence supporting the allegation that a departure from
academic integrity has occurred, provide the student(s) an opportunity to respond, and
outline the steps that will be taken subsequent to the meeting.
4.4.5. Resolution
Once the instructor and student(s) have met and discussed the alleged departure from
academic integrity, two outcomes are possible:
4.4.5.1.

Informal Resolution
In cases where, after meeting with the student(s), the instructor is satisfied that
no departure from academic integrity occurred, the instructor and student(s)
may agree that the situation is resolved and no further action is taken. The
instructor shall confirm this informal resolution with the student(s) in writing via
BU email, with copy sent to the Dean and to the Registrar’s Office for
reinstatement of the student’s ability to withdraw from the course.

4.4.5.2.

Formal Resolution
In cases where a student fails to respond to the instructor’s meeting invitation or,
after meeting with the student(s), the instructor is convinced that the student is
(students are) responsible for a departure from academic integrity, the instructor
must report the departure to the Dean of the Faculty/School in which the
course/activity is offered. In the event that the instructor is also the Dean of the
Faculty/School in which the course/activity is offered, the instructor will submit
the report to one of the other Faculty/School Deans at Brandon University.
The instructor will submit a report, with copy to the student(s) and the University
Registrar, to the Dean’s Office normally within 5 business days of meeting with
the student(s). The report will include a description of the departure from
academic integrity, supporting documentation, and the instructor’s
recommendation regarding remedy/sanction. In determining the
remedy/sanction recommendation, the instructor should consult Section 4.5, and
the recommendation should be accompanied by a rationale in accordance with
disciplinary norms, regulatory requirements, and professional standards.

This document is available in PDF format on the Brandon University website. This document can be
obtained in alternative formats from the Office of the President, Room 116 Clark Hall.

Page 10 of 17

Upon receiving such a report, the Dean (or designate) will reach out to the
student via BU email to invite the student to provide a response to the report,
either in person or in writing, within a specified time period. The student is not
obligated to provide a response.

The Dean (or designate) will review the instructor’s report and the student’s
response (if provided) and will determine whether or not the student is
responsible for having departed from academic integrity. If required, the Dean
may seek additional information from the instructor, the student, and/or other
relevant sources. In cases where the Dean is satisfied that no departure from
academic integrity occurred, the Dean will confirm this with the student in
writing via BU email, with copy sent to the instructor and to the Registrar’s Office
for reinstatement of the student’s ability to withdraw from the course.
In cases where the Dean is convinced, on the balance of probabilities, that a
student is responsible for a departure from academic integrity, the Dean will do
the following:
1.

2.

Consult the BU Academic Integrity Repository to determine whether the
student has previously been found responsible for a departure from
academic integrity; and
Determine the appropriate remedy(ies)/sanction(s).
a. The Dean may consult the course instructor to acquire
discipline/course/assignment-specific information that would inform
determination of the appropriate remedy(ies)/sanction(s).
b. If, in the Dean’s estimation, the departure seems to have resulted
from the student’s ignorance and/or inexperience, the Dean may
impose remedial activity as described in Section 4.5.1.
c. If, in the Dean’s estimation, the departure is significant, taking into
account the scope and impact of the departure as well as the
student’s level of study and past academic integrity history, the Dean
may impose sanctions as described in Section 4.5.2.

Within 15 business days of the instructor reporting the departure from academic
integrity to the Dean, the Dean’s Office will send written notification of the
Dean’s decision, including, where applicable, information on imposed
remedy(ies)/sanction(s) (included detailed rationale for determination of such
remedy(ies)/sanction(s)) and appeal options, to the instructor, the student(s),
and the University Registrar. In cases where the Dean believes Tier 3 sanctions

This document is available in PDF format on the Brandon University website. This document can be
obtained in alternative formats from the Office of the President, Room 116 Clark Hall.

Page 11 of 17

are appropriate, the Dean’s Office will also send written recommendation of such
sanctions to the President.
Normally within 10 business days of receiving such a recommendation for Tier 3
sanctions, the President will review the case and approve or revise the Dean’s
recommended sanction, sending written confirmation of the decision, including
information on appeal options, to the student(s), the instructor, the Dean, and
the University Registrar.
In the exceptional event that the Dean requires more than 15 business days to
determine and communicate a decision, the Dean must submit an extension
request to the Provost & Vice-President (Academic) indicating the reasons for
which additional time is required and specifying the desired extension period.
Within 2 business days of receiving an extension request, the Provost & VicePresident (Academic) will respond to the request in writing, with copy to the
University Registrar. If the extension request is approved, the Provost & VicePresident (Academic) will clearly indicate the final date for the Dean to release
their decision on the instructor’s report. In the event that the Provost fails to
respond to the Dean’s request for extension within 2 business days, it shall be
assumed that no extension is granted.
Any instructor report for which the Dean’s decision has not been issued by the
end of 15 business days (or the end of the approved extension period, as
applicable) will be considered closed and the student found not responsible for
having departed from academic integrity. Such a closure due to delayed Dean’s
response will be communicated to the student, instructor, and Dean by the
University Registrar.
4.5. Remedies and Sanctions
4.5.1. Remedies
A remedy is an educational activity applied when a student’s departure from academic
integrity is deemed to have resulted from ignorance and/or inexperience.
Remedial activity includes, but is not limited to:
•
•
•

Participating in a discussion/tutorial on academic integrity;
Written reflection pertaining to the departure;
Requirements to repeat the assignment or academic activity with no grade
reduction.

4.5.2. Sanctions

This document is available in PDF format on the Brandon University website. This document can be
obtained in alternative formats from the Office of the President, Room 116 Clark Hall.

Page 12 of 17

A sanction is an academic consequence applied when a departure from academic
integrity is deemed to be significant, taking into account the scope and impact of
the departure as well as the student’s level of study and past academic integrity
history.
4.5.2.1.

Tier 1 Sanctions
Tier 1 sanctions are generally appropriate for minor, usually isolated, departures
from academic integrity that are limited in scope and impact, taking into account
the student’s level of study and academic integrity history. Tier 1 sanctions
include, but are not limited to the following:
•
•

4.5.2.2.

Requirement to repeat the assignment or academic activity with grade
reduction;
Assignment of a grade of zero for the assignment or academic activity.
Tier 2 Sanctions
Tier 2 sanctions are generally appropriate for departures from academic integrity
that are moderate to serious in scope and impact, taking into account the
student’s level of study and past academic integrity history, or for situations
where a student has been found responsible for multiple minor departures from
academic integrity. Tier 2 sanctions include, but are not limited to the following:

•
•

4.5.2.3.

Assignment of a grade of F-AD in the course in which the departure from
academic integrity occurred;
Suspension from all Brandon University teams, clubs or like organizations for a
period of 1 to 5 years.
Tier 3 Sanctions
Tier 3 sanctions are reserved for the most egregious departures from academic
integrity and/or for situations where a student has departed from academic
integrity on numerous, successive occasions. Tier 3 sanctions include, but are not
limited to the following:

•
•
•
•
•

Suspension from the Faculty/School for a period of 1 to 5 years
Expulsion from the Faculty/School
Suspension from the University for a period of 1 to 5 years
Expulsion from the University
Cancellation or revocation of credential/degree

This document is available in PDF format on the Brandon University website. This document can be
obtained in alternative formats from the Office of the President, Room 116 Clark Hall.

Page 13 of 17

The Dean may recommend Tier 3 sanctions to the President. The President will
approve or revise such sanction recommendations.
Students who are expelled from a Faculty/School are not eligible to apply for
readmission to a program in that Faculty/School for a minimum of 7 years.
Students who are expelled from the University are not eligible to apply for
readmission to the University for a minimum of 7 years. After 7 years, students
who have been expelled from a Faculty/School or from the University who wish
to return may appeal, in writing, to the University President for special
permission to apply for readmission. The appeal letter must include a reflection
upon the circumstances that led to the expulsion, a description of the student’s
activities since expulsion, and the student’s goals for returning to study along
with a concrete plan to ensure adherence to the fundamental values of academic
integrity moving forward. Within 10 business days of receiving an appeal, the
President will issue a decision in writing to the appellant with copy to the
Director of Admissions & Awards and the University Registrar.
A person who is found responsible for having departed from academic integrity
after having been approved for graduation, or after having a credential/degree
conferred, may have the credential/degree rescinded or revoked when, in the
opinion of the President, the departure, if detected, would have resulted in a
sanction sufficiently severe that the credential/degree would not have been
granted at the time that it was.
4.6. Appeals
4.6.1. Grounds for Appeal
A student may submit an appeal within the scope of this policy only under the following
circumstances:
•
•
•
•

There was a fundamental procedural error during the investigation and/or
resolution of the situation; or
New information has come to light that was not reasonably available to the
instructor and/or Dean during the initial process; or
The instructor and/or Dean demonstrated bias in the investigation and/or
decisioning process; or
The remedy(ies)/sanction(s) applied was inappropriate relative to the departure
from academic integrity.

This document is available in PDF format on the Brandon University website. This document can be
obtained in alternative formats from the Office of the President, Room 116 Clark Hall.

Page 14 of 17

4.6.2. Appeal Process
The appeal process proceeds as outlined below:
1.

Normally within 10 business days of receiving written notification of the
remedy(ies)/sanction(s) applied for the departure from academic integrity, the
student (hereinafter “appellant”) will submit an appeal package to the Academic
Integrity Committee (c/o the Senate Office). The appeal package will include the
following items:
•
•
•

A completed Academic Integrity Student Appeal Form (not required for
instructor appeals);
An appeal letter outlining the circumstances pertaining to the situation and
clearly stating the grounds for the appeal;
All available supporting documentation that will corroborate the content of
the appeal letter.

2.

Normally within 2 business days of appeal submission, the Senate Office will
provide a notice of appeal to the Dean (and to the President where the appeal
relates to application of Tier 3 sanctions), including a copy of the appellant’s
complete appeal submission.

3.

Normally within 5 business days of receiving a notice of appeal, the
Dean/President will submit a written response to the Senate Office. The response
will include the following items:
•
•
•

A clear outline of the rationale that led to the initial decision on the case;
All available supporting documentation justifying the initial decision on the
case; and
If applicable, a rebuttal of the appellant’s arguments in favour of the appeal.

4.

Normally within 2 business days of receiving the Dean/President’s response(s), the
Senate Office will provide a copy of the full response(s) to the appellant.

5.

Normally within 5 business days of receiving the response(s), the appellant will
submit to the Senate Office a written response to the Dean/President’s
submission(s).

6.

The Academic Integrity Committee will normally meet within 20 business days of
appeal submission to review all documentation pertaining to the appeal and to
make a decision.
Should the Committee require additional information to make a decision, it will
cease deliberations and set a new meeting date, normally not more than 10

This document is available in PDF format on the Brandon University website. This document can be
obtained in alternative formats from the Office of the President, Room 116 Clark Hall.

Page 15 of 17

business days from the first meeting. The Senate Office will obtain and distribute
the required additional information to Committee members in advance of its
second meeting at which a decision will be made.
7.

The Committee’s decision will be communicated in writing to the student,
instructor, Dean, President (if applicable), and the University Registrar. Decisions of
the Academic Integrity Committee are final.

4.7. Records
4.7.1. BU Academic Integrity Repository Entries
The Registrar’s Office is responsible for entering all departures from academic integrity
that have resulted in application of a remedy and/or sanction into the BU Academic
Integrity Repository.
4.7.2. Removal of BU Academic Integrity Repository Entries
With the exception of cases of expulsion from a Faculty/School, expulsion from the
University, and/or revocation of a credential/degree, a student may appeal, in their last
term prior to graduation or at any time thereafter, to have entries related to their
departures from academic integrity deleted from the BU Academic Integrity Repository.
Decisions of the Academic Integrity Committee on such appeals are final.
BU Academic Integrity Repository entries related to a student’s expulsion from a
Faculty/School, expulsion from the University, and/or revocation of a credential/degree
remain in the repository in perpetuity.
4.7.3. Transcript Notations
Departures from academic integrity that result in application of remedies and/or Tier 1
sanctions are not noted on students’ transcripts. Departures that result in application of
Tier 2 and/or Tier 3 sanctions are noted on students’ transcripts.
4.7.4. Removal of Transcript Notations
With the exception of cases of expulsion from a Faculty/School, expulsion from the
University, and/or revocation of a credential/degree, a student may appeal, in their last
term prior to graduation or at any time thereafter, to have notations related to Tier 2
and/or Tier 3 sanctions removed from their transcript. Decisions of the Academic
Integrity Committee on such appeals are final.

This document is available in PDF format on the Brandon University website. This document can be
obtained in alternative formats from the Office of the President, Room 116 Clark Hall.

Page 16 of 17

Transcript notations related to a student’s expulsion from a Faculty/School, expulsion
from the University, and/or revocation of a credential/degree remain on the student’s
transcript in perpetuity.
4.8. Alternative Remedies
Brandon University reserves the right to seek other remedies (e.g. civil and/or criminal) beyond
those afforded by this policy.
5. POLICY AUTHORITY
•

Policy Sponsor: Provost and Vice-President (Academic)

•

Primary Contact: University Registrar

•

Approval Authority: Senate

6. RELEVANT LEGISLATION
None.
7. RELATED POLICY DOCUMENTS
Current related BU Policies:
• Policy on Academic Integrity in Research, Scholarship, and Creative Activity (1995)
Policy repealed upon adoption of this Academic Integrity Policy:
• Policy on Academic Dishonesty & Misconduct (2007)
8. REFERENCES
Fairness. (n.d.). In Merriam-Webster online. Retrieved from
https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/fairness
Honesty. (n.d.). In Merriam-Webster online. Retrieved from
https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/honesty
International Center for Academic Integrity (ICAI) (2014). The Fundamental Values of Academic
Integrity (2nd ed.). T. Fishman (Ed.). Clemson, SC: Clemson University.
Respect. (n.d.). In Merriam-Webster online. Retrieved from

This document is available in PDF format on the Brandon University website. This document can be
obtained in alternative formats from the Office of the President, Room 116 Clark Hall.

Page 17 of 17

https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/respect
Responsibility. (n.d.). In Merriam-Webster online. Retrieved from
https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/responsibility
Stryker, C. and Kavakoglu, E. (2024). What is AI? IBM.
Retrieved August 23, 2024, from https://www.ibm.com/topics/artificial-intelligence
Trust. (n.d.). In Merriam-Webster online. Retrieved from
https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/trust
University of Guelph (2019). 2019-2020 Undergraduate Calendar. Retrieved from
https://www.uoguelph.ca/registrar/calendars/undergraduate/current/c08/c08amisconductpen.shtml (Used with permission.)
University of Victoria (n.d.). Policy on Academic Integrity. Retrieved from
https://web.uvic.ca/calendar2019-01/undergrad/info/regulations/academic-integrity.html
(Used with permission.)
9. REVISION HISTORY
Approved by Senate: 23 JULY 2020
Policy Effective: 9 SEPTEMBER 2020
Revised by Senate: 17 DECEMBER 2024

This document is available in PDF format on the Brandon University website. This document can be
obtained in alternative formats from the Office of the President, Room 116 Clark Hall.
