false

-

Using artificial intelligence tools responsibly
false
false

-

Using AI to learn
true
true

50%

Using AI to learn

We expect you to use artificial intelligence responsibly to support, not replace, your learning.

m-hero--simple

false

You’re welcome to use generative AI tools outside of formal assessments to support your learning. For example, you can:

- explore complex topics
- plan out your study
- brainstorm ideas
- practise explanations
- summarise material
- check your grammar and structure.

Best practices

Avoid over-relying on AI for translations

This may reduce your language learning and produce inaccurate results.

Never enter personal or sensitive information into AI tools

Public AI tools can store and reuse what you type. Don’t enter names, student IDs, assignment questions, personal details, health or patient info, or any University content.

Only use University-endorsed tools like Copilot

All students have free access to Microsoft Copilot for Web. Make sure that you log in with your UniKey using Okta so that you are using Copilot in protected mode, which introduces necessary guardrails within the system.

You should not rely on the accuracy of generative AI outputs

Generative AI models do not 'know' anything. Rather, they predict answers based on patterns from the internet’s existing information. Generative AI outputs may include entirely false information (also known as 'AI hallucinations') so you should always be careful when using the outputs.

You're responsible for the work that you submit

Alongside the accuracy of the outputs, these also reflect the biases of the material on which the models are trained. Always make sure that your work reflects your own values.

Don't let your use of generative AI prevent you from developing crucial writing and communication skills

Learning to communicate effectively in your own words, whether in written or spoken communication, is an indispensable skill in any profession. Use generative AI to improve your communication skills rather than letting it do the writing or talking for you.

Relying too heavily on AI in open assessments can leave gaps in your learning, which may affect your ability to succeed in secure assessments that are essential for completing your degree.

AI models don't know facts

They generate text based on patterns from data and may provide incorrect or misleading information (known as 'AI hallucinations').

Don't let AI do the work for you

Writing, problem-solving and communication are essential academic and professional skills.

Last updated: 02 June 2026

Website feedback

Tell us if you’ve spotted a typo or something else wrong with this page. If you have an enquiry or need help with something else such as your enrolment, course etc you can contact the Student Centre.
