Academic Integrity and Classroom Conduct

ACADEMIC INTEGRITY AND
CLASSROOM CONDUCT
ACADEMIC INTEGRITY POLICY
As scholars in Christian community, we seek to glorify God in all that we
do, practicing good stewardship of our intellectual gifts and the gift of
education. The academic integrity policy below Is built upon three core
principles:
• Truth: Students should be honest and forthright about the
sources of information used in assignments and exams.
• Virtue: Students should follow the guidelines established by
their professors for assignments and exams.
• Service: When concerns about academic integrity arise, we
follow a clear process that balances accountability and grace,
allowing us to grow together in community.
Violations of academic integrity take various forms, including plagiarism,
cheating, falsiﬁcation, or inappropriate use of Artiﬁcial Intelligence.
Each of these forms is explained below, along with the process for
investigating and addressing violations of academic integrity and the
consequences for such.

Plagiarism
To plagiarize is to present someone else’s work—his or her words, line
of thought, or organizational structure—as our own. This occurs when
sources are not cited properly, or when permission is not obtained from
the original author to use his or her work. By not acknowledging the
sources that are used in our work, we are wrongfully taking material that
is not our own and misrepresenting our own work. Another’s person’s
“work” can take many forms: printed or electronic copies of computer
programs, musical compositions, drawings, paintings, oral presentations,
papers, essays, articles or chapters, statistical data, tables or ﬁgures, etc.
In short, if any information that can be considered the intellectual property
of another is used without acknowledging the original source properly, this is
plagiarism. Plagiarism may include:
1. inserting verbatim phrases, sentences, or longer sections from a
source without attribution
2. substituting synonyms or reordering clauses from a source,
rather than expressing the ideas in an original sentence
3. using a source’s line of logic, thesis or ideas
4. combining paraphrasing with verbatim sentences to create a
paragraph or more of text

1

Cheating
Cheating is obtaining or helping another to obtain credit for work
accomplished by deceptive means. This may include:
1. talking or communicating through signals with another student
during a quiz or exam
2. using unauthorized materials such as electronic devices, written
notes, or unauthorized website tabs during an exam
3. copying or sharing information during an exam
4. taking, using, sharing, or posting an exam or answer key
5. leaving during an exam to obtain information
6. providing false information about the procedure used to take an
exam or complete an assignment
7. claiming credit for work not accomplished personally

Falsiﬁcation
Falsiﬁcation is the alteration of information, documents, or other
evidence in order to mislead. This may include:
1. fabrication or falsiﬁcation of data, analysis, citations or other
information for assignments, exams, speeches or any other
academic work
2. forgery or unauthorized alteration of ofﬁcial documents,
credentials, or signatures
3. misrepresentation of one’s academic accomplishments,
experiences, credentials, or expertise
4. withholding information related to admission, transfer credits,
disciplinary actions, ﬁnancial aid, or academic status

Unauthorized Use of Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Artiﬁcial Intelligence for academic purposes is prohibited unless explicitly
authorized by members of the faculty for their assigned courses. Some
professors allow students to use Artiﬁcial Intelligence for tasks like
brainstorming, research support, and exam preparation, but this is
permissible only with explicit instructor permission and proper disclosure/
citation. Each course syllabus includes guidelines for how Artiﬁcial
Intelligence may be used in the class (if at all). Students should take
special care with programs that provide grammar checks and revision
suggestions, as some of these programs use Artiﬁcial Intelligence to
substantially re-write papers and may be in violation of a professor’s
syllabus guidelines. When Artiﬁcial Intelligence is used, it must be cited
using the standard citation method of the relevant academic discipline
(APA, MLA, etc.) unless directed otherwise by the professor.

7. purchasing an assignment and submitting it as your own

Students are responsible for reading syllabus guidelines at the beginning
of the semester and contacting their professors with any questions.
Students may not submit AI-generated content as original, misrepresent
the source of their work, use Artiﬁcial Intelligence to circumvent the
learning objectives or a course, or violate data privacy. Using Artiﬁcial
Intelligence in ways prohibited in the class syllabus is considered
academic dishonesty.

8. reusing or modifying previously submitted work (e.g., from
another course) for a present assignment without obtaining
prior approval from the instructors involved

Consequences for Plagiarism, Cheating, Falsiﬁcation,
and Unauthorized Artiﬁcial Intelligence Use

9. aiding another student in plagiarizing in the above or other ways

When academic dishonesty is suspected, the student is offered an
opportunity to meet with their professor to discuss the issue. These
conversations give students an opportunity to share their perspective,

5. submitting or presenting someone’s complete published or
unpublished work (paper, article, or chapter)
6. submitting another student’s work for an assignment, or
allowing another student to submit your work

2

Academic Integrity and Classroom Conduct

and professors an opportunity to review academic expectations reinforce
the nature of academic integrity and the values of a scholarly Christian
community. Following this conversation, the professor determines
whether academic dishonesty has occurred. If the professor determines
that academic dishonesty has not occurred, no further action is needed. If
the professor determines that academic dishonesty has occurred:
For a ﬁrst offense in a course, the student typically receives a zero
on the assignment or exam, and a Report of Academic Dishonesty*
is submitted via Faculty Central. At the professor’s discretion, the
student may be allowed to revise and resubmit the assignment/
exam (with or without points penalty) rather than receiving a zero.
For a second offense in a course, the student typically receives a
failing grade in the course, and a Report of Academic Dishonesty*
is submitted via Faculty Central. The School/ College Dean of the
student’s major convenes a meeting with the student and student’s
Department Chair to discuss the concern.
Repeated violations of the academic integrity policy (in the same
class or different classes) will result in additional disciplinary
sanctions, up to and including dismissal or expulsion from the
university. The School/College Dean will determine such sanctions.
*Additional information about Reports of Academic Dishonesty:
Reporting is required whenever a professor determines that academic
dishonesty has occurred. Faculty should submit one report via Faculty
Central for each incident and should complete the report as soon as
possible after the incident occurs. Reports should describe the evidence
used to determine that academic dishonesty has occurred, including
the name of any programs used by the professor to detect cheating,
plagiarism, or AI use and a copy of the report those programs generated.
Reports of Academic Dishonesty are submitted electronically via Faculty
Central and automatically forwarded to the Department Chair or Program
Director who oversees the course where the academic dishonestly
occurred.
Whenever a second (or more) Report of Academic Dishonesty is
submitted for the same student, additional notiﬁcation (including copies
of all reports) is sent to the School/ College Dean who oversees the
student’s major.

Appeals
Students’ Rights The goal of the appeals policy is to ensure a fair,
transparent, and educational process for students who wish to contest
ﬁndings or sanctions related to alleged academic dishonesty. Students
subject to academic integrity allegations have the right to receive notice
of the speciﬁc allegation and to review the Academic Integrity Report
(including any supplemental evidence) submitted by their professor. They
have the right to respond, to have an impartial review by the Department
Chair, Dean, and/or Provost, and to receive a timely decision with clear
notiﬁcation of outcomes. Conﬁdentiality will be maintained in a manner
consistent with FERPA and institutional policies. Students have the right
to appeal without facing retaliation.
Grounds for Appeal Students may appeal a ﬁnding and/or sanction
based on the following grounds: insufﬁcient evidence to support the
ﬁnding, new evidence that could materially affect the outcome, excessive

sanctions that are disproportionate to the violation, or bias or conflict of
interest affecting the integrity of the process.
Formal Review Process Students may initiate an appeal by emailing the
appropriate academic administrator—this is the Department Chair or
Graduate Program Director who oversees the course. Appeals must be
submitted in writing within 14 business days after receiving the initial
decision from the professor. Students should clearly state the grounds
for appeal and include supporting evidence or explanation. The Chair or
Director will review the student’s appeal, along with the original Report
of Academic Dishonesty and its supporting documentation and make a
determination.
Students who have additional concerns after the ﬁrst level of appeal
may continue the appeal process by requesting review by the School or
College Dean who oversees the course. The ﬁnal level of appeal is to the
Provost/Vice President for Academic Affairs. The decision of the Provost/
Vice President for Academic Affairs is considered ﬁnal and the matter is
not subject to further appeal.
Outcomes and Documentation At each level of appeal, the reviewing
authority may uphold the original ﬁnding and sanctions, uphold the
original ﬁnding but modify the sanctions, or reverse the original ﬁnding.
Whenever a student appeals to a Chair/ Director, Dean, or Provost an
addendum is added to the original report so the student’s ﬁle accurately
reflects the outcome of their appeal.

COMPUTER USAGE: STUDENT
GUIDELINES
(This section is excerpted from the Vanguard University Student
Handbook (https://www.vanguard.edu/fs/resource-manager/
view/4c65f2d7-2578-470f-8259-8be0a8c5e115/))
As an educational institution, VU is ﬁrmly committed to the discovery
of truth, the life of the mind, and the free interchange of ideas. The
University recognizes that in order for the best learning to take place,
students will be exposed to hostile, offensive, and even subversive ideas,
so that the students can confront and wrestle with the whole range of
ideas and philosophies in the intellectual marketplace. It is therefore the
position of the University that students should use maturity and selfdiscipline in accessing potentially offensive material.
At the same time, VU is more than just an educational institution. It is
a spiritual community committed to nurturing its members, providing
them with good values and an atmosphere as positive and wholesome as
possible.
The Information Technology Department, therefore, reserves the right
to regulate or prohibit access to obscene, pornographic, and unlawful
materials (such as by way of the internet) and distribution of such
materials over the campus network.
Students using University computing and network resources are required
to use them in a manner consistent with the University's standard of
conduct. The framework of responsible, considerate, and ethical behavior
expected by the University extends to cover the use of campus facilities
and network resources and networks throughout the world to which
electronic access has been provided by the University. Computing and
network resources and user accounts are owned by the University and

Academic Integrity and Classroom Conduct

are to be used for university-related activities only. Computer equipment
and accounts at VU should be used for legitimate instructional, research,
and administrative or other approved purposes. By enrolling at the
University students agree to abide by the guidelines listed herein and in
the ofﬁcial Technology Use Policy.

Student Computing and Network
VU makes available computing and network resources for use by the
University's students.
VU students have certain privileges. They include:
• Use of Campus LAN, Wireless LAN, and intranet
• E-mail
• Use of internet

Campus Printer Kiosks

3

who encounter or observe a gap in system or network security
should immediately report the gap to the manager of that
system. Abuse of a discovered gap rather than reporting it can
result in disciplinary action.
• Students that are not certain they have permission to copy,
compile or manipulate software or data should assume that
they do not have permission.
• The University's policies on harassment apply equally to
electronic displays and communications as they do to more
traditional means of display and communication. Students
must not display or transmit images, sounds or messages that
could create an atmosphere of discomfort or harassment for
others.
• Messages, sentiments, and declarations sent as electronic mail
or postings must meet the same standards for distribution or
display as printed documents.

Vanguard University provides several print kiosk stations on campus
that feature high quality laser printers. Print transaction can be made via
the http://print.vanguard.edu website from either the wired or wireless
network anywhere on campus by uploading supported documents to
the Web Print tab and selecting the kiosk location desired. Documents
will not be charged or printed until they are released by logging in to
the kiosk or remotely under the Jobs Pending Release section of http://
print.vanguard.edu. This allows students to print from their room or
wirelessly and not worry if their print job will be accidentally removed by
another student. For kiosk locations please visit the web page at https://
www.vanguard.edu/student-portal/it.

• Students are not permitted to send spam e-mail to faculty, staff,
or students on campus. Email regarding ofﬁcial VU business or
events must receive approval through the IT Department and be
routed through the division or department sponsoring the event.

Student Responsibilities

• Students are not permitted to use or connect their personal
network equipment to the Vanguard Network including wireless
routers, network switchers or network hubs. VUIT will provide
additional switches if necessary.

To protect the quality and reliability of computing and network resources,
students must observe the following responsibilities. This list is not
comprehensive, but it includes the responsibilities that students accept
whenever they choose to use the University's computing resources and/
or network, which the University provides:
• Student use of the campus network, the internet, and e-mail
must be consistent with the mission and character of VU. VU's
information technology resources may not be used for any
unauthorized purpose or for any activity that is harmful, illegal,
obscene, or harassing.
• Students must not apply for a user-ID under false pretenses.
Once a student has received a user-ID for access to the VU
network, e-mail and computer systems on that network, he/she
is solely responsible for all actions taken when that user-ID is
used.
• Students must not share or use another person's user-ID,
password or e-mail account. Students should never leave a
terminal or PC while logged on and leave it unattended for more
than a few minutes. Students should never write down their
user-ID and password. Students should also change passwords
frequently.
• Students must not intentionally seek information about, browse,
copy, or modify a ﬁle belonging to another person, whether at
VU or elsewhere, unless that student has been granted explicit
permission by the owner of the ﬁle.
• Students are authorized to use only computer resources and
information to which they have been granted access. Students

• Use of the network folder is a privilege for academic purposes.
Students are expected to stay within the space limits posted in
the main lab.
• Students must not degrade computing or network performance
in any way that will prevent others from meeting their
educational or university business goals. Academic work by
students takes precedence over personal usage.

• Students must not create or willfully disseminate computer
viruses. All students should be sensitive to the ease of
spreading viruses and should take steps to ensure all ﬁles are
virus-free.
• Students must not install any additional software on VU
computer equipment.
• Equipment and supplies for VU labs should be treated with
care. Any student who abuses equipment or takes supplies
from the labs will lose lab privileges and be charged the cost of
repair or replacement. Any student who steals equipment will be
prosecuted under the law.

COMPUTER DISHONESTY
Violation of Copyright
Copyrighted programs and printed documentation may not be copied,
distributed to others, or used on any machine outside of the computer
labs, unless permitted under the terms of the software licenses between
VU and the software manufacturers. Unauthorized copying is theft.
Moreover, students with personal computers on campus are expected to
not participate in software pirating or use pirated software.

4

Academic Integrity and Classroom Conduct

Invasion of Privacy
The ﬁles and programs of other people are private property. It is unethical
for you to read, alter, or copy such private programs or ﬁles, unless you
have explicit permission to do so by the owner.

Disciplinary Procedures
If you violate any of the above guidelines, disciplinary action will be
taken. The University reserves the right to monitor trafﬁc on the network,
including contents, and to examine ﬁles on the system which are
connected to the network. Depending upon the seriousness of the
offense, the following procedure will be followed:
1. You may be required to perform community service.
2. You may be required to pay a designated ﬁne. If computer
equipment is damaged, you will be required to pay for replacing
the damaged equipment.
3. You may have your computer privileges temporarily or
permanently revoked.
4. You may lose credit for the assignment, test, or even the entire
course.
5. You may be dismissed from the University.
6. In serious cases, your name and a description of the violation(s)
may be reported to the police. California Penal Code Section
502 makes certain computer abuses a crime, and penalties can
range up to a $10,000 ﬁne and up to three years in prison.
You may appeal any decision to the Student Conduct Committee.

Internet Material
All members of the VU community are encouraged to practice discretion
and restraint in the materials that they access over the Internet. Obscene,
pornographic, or unlawful materials accessed over the Internet are
neither educationally nor spiritually purposeful and therefore should be
avoided. Student use of the Internet is a privilege which can be revoked
for cause.

CLASSROOM CONDUCT
All students have the right to learn without interference from others.
Faculty members have the authority to protect this right by creating
and maintaining an environment that is conducive to learning. Students
are expected to conduct themselves in a manner that is respectful of all
others and does not disrupt the learning experience of others. Should an
instructor determine that a student's conduct is disruptive, the instructor
may impose the student's immediate removal from the classroom. The
student may be referred for disciplinary action. The student may appeal
to the Department Chair, and, if necessary, to the relevant school/college
dean, and ﬁnally to the Provost.
