Academic Integrity Procedure
Procedure 05: 2024 Version 1.1
Effective from: 6 October 2025

Date

Supersedes

Description of Change

6 October 2025

2024 Version 1

Minor updates to reflect
updated Gen AI guidance.

26 April 2024

2019 Version 3.3

Minor changes to titles.
Inclusion of guiding principles
and reference to Generative
Artificial Intelligence.

1 February 2021

2019 Version 3.2

Minor changes to job titles.

2018 version.

General update.

1 August 2019.

Document Owner

Approved By

Date Approved

Review Frequency

Registry: Quality &
Standards

Senate Regulations
and Special Cases
Committee.

6 October 2025.

Every three years.

Note: In exceptional circumstances, and subject to approval by the Chair of the Senate
Regulations and Special Cases Committee, responsibilities assigned to Schools, Heads, of
School, School Officers or School Committees in these Regulations may be assumed by the
College, Head of College, College Officers or College Committees respectively, as
appropriate.

Procedure 05: 2024 Version 1.1

Academic Integrity Procedure

This Procedure seeks to strengthen academic integrity, and address academic misconduct
in conjunction with schools, staff, and students. The guiding principle that underpins this
procedure is that the content (e.g., the basic written expression, the composition,
arguments, interpretations, conclusions etc.) of work submitted for assessment should be
a student’s own. This procedure sets out actions which may go against this principle, and
may, if proven, represent an instance of academic misconduct.
Referrals and supporting evidence at all stages of this procedure should be sent to
academicintegrity@bangor.ac.uk.
Definitions
1. Academic integrity means being honest, trustworthy, diligent, fair and respectful,
and is about ensuring the integrity of a student’s work and ultimately the award
they receive from Bangor University. This Academic Integrity Procedure applies to
issues in both examinations and coursework (including written, and oral work,
dissertations and theses).
2. Academic misconduct includes (but is not limited to) issues of plagiarism, collusion,
cheating, breach of examination regulations, fabrication of data, impersonation of
others or the use of essay banks or mills for assessment.
3. Poor academic practice is weaknesses in the way that the work of others is
referenced or over-reliance on referenced material with insufficient independent
academic input from the student.
About this Procedure
1. This Procedure deals with allegations of academic misconduct in examinations and
coursework, including assessment in non-award-bearing courses.
2. This Procedure relates to all registered Bangor University students, whether they are
studying within the United Kingdom or internationally with one of the University’s
partner organisations. This Procedure does not apply to the University’s validated
provision; however, partner arrangements should reflect this Procedure.
3. The responsibilities of schools, staff and students are listed in Appendix 1 and
Appendix 2. Prevention of instances of academic misconduct is always preferable to
applying penalties, and Appendices 1 and 2 include guidance for schools, staff, and
students on how to avoid instances of academic misconduct, and how to promote
academic integrity. The use of Turnitin to detect plagiarism is described in Appendix 3.
4. When an allegation of academic misconduct is made, it is important that the student is
treated as innocent of the allegation, unless there is sufficient evidence to prove, on
the balance of probabilities, that the allegations are true.
5. Allegations of academic misconduct can only be considered within the programme of
study for which a student is registered. For example, proven allegations from an
2

Procedure 05: 2024 Version 1.1
undergraduate programme must not be carried forward to a Master’s programme.
If an allegation of academic misconduct is made after an award of the University has been
conferred (or a non-award-bearing course has been completed), the allegation must be
referred to the Head of Governance and Compliance. The Head of Governance and
Compliance will decide whether to convene a Panel of Enquiry to consider the allegation.
Examples
6. Examples of academic misconduct are shown below. These are examples, and other
actions can fall within the general definition of academic misconduct.
A. Examples of Academic Misconduct in Coursework
[i]

Plagiarism: using without acknowledgement another person’s words or
ideas and submitting them for assessment as though it were one’s own work.
This includes copying materials from the internet, unfair use of generative
artificial intelligence software, rewriting published material without
acknowledging the source and the translation of materials using
unauthorized methods.

[ii]

Collusion: working with another person to submit some or all the other
person’s work as their own. Offering to work with someone to help them by
writing and/or proposing some or all the other person’s work. This also
applies where the work of one student is submitted in the name of another
or where two or more students submit an identical or very similar piece of
work. Where this is done with the knowledge of the originator, or if the
originator has been reckless as to whether the work might be copied, both
students can be at fault.

[iii]

Fabrication of data: making false claims to have carried out experiments,
observations, interviews or other forms of data collection and analysis.

[iv]

Misrepresentation of data, including inventing data or omitting data.

[v]

Presentation of false evidence of special circumstances to a Board of
Examiners.

[vi]

Conducting research without the required ethical approval and/or other
relevant permissions.

[vii]

Failing to obtain proper informed consent (as defined by the General Data
Protection Regulation, the Data Protection Act 2018, and the University’s
Data Protection Policy, and also the research ethics procedures) from
participants in research projects or failure to adhere to agreed protocols for
obtaining and recording consent.

[viii]

Obtaining documents, and / or assignment tasks from, individuals,
companies or agencies and submitting them for assessment as though it
were one’s own work, usually paying for the work. Alternatively, offering to
produce some or all of another student’s work. These activities are known as
contract cheating.

[ix]

Self plagiarism: re-using work for which credit has already been achieved at
the University or elsewhere (unless specific permission to do this has been
granted). The guiding principle is that no one piece of assessed coursework
may overlap substantially in material with any other piece of assessed work.
3

[x]

Procedure 05: 2024 Version 1.1
Promoting ways to breach academic integrity by sharing information with
other students about ways to commit academic misconduct, or by facilitating
academic misconduct.

B. Examples of academic misconduct in examinations
[i]

Taking unauthorised materials such as a book, loose papers, mobile phone
or smart device into an examination room.

[ii]

Concealing information on their person to take into the examination room
e.g. writing information on hands, arms etc.

[ii]

Copying from another person in the examination room.

[iii]

Communicating with another person when in the examination room.

[iv]

Impersonating a student or allowing oneself to be impersonated.

[v]

Presenting an examination script as one’s own work when the script includes
material produced by unauthorised means including collusion.

[vi]

Receiving restricted information relating to the assessment without the
approval of the examination supervisor.

[vi]

Presenting false evidence of special circumstances to a Board of Examiners.

Special circumstances
7. Special circumstances must be reported by students to schools at the time when they
occur, so that deadlines for coursework can be extended or the arrangements for
examinations can be altered.
8. Special circumstances cannot be used to justify academic misconduct but can be taken
into account when a penalty is imposed.
9. Students can present details of special circumstances when an allegation has been
made. Students must only present details that are directly relevant to the allegation
and the time of the alleged offence. Students must present the details, with supporting
evidence, before any meeting about the allegation. The Chairs of Boards of Examiners
and Panels of Enquiry have the authority to determine and assess whether such
evidence is genuine, taking into account the source of the evidence and the way it has
been presented. Special circumstances submitted by the student will be kept
confidential, and only shared as appropriate in order to consider the student’s case.
Referring allegations of academic misconduct
10. Allegations of academic misconduct, in examinations or coursework, must be referred
to the Chair of the Board of Examiners in the student’s home school in the first
instance, who in the case of franchised provision can forward the case to the partner
school. The Chair must liaise with the school responsible for delivering the module if
the allegation relates to a module outside the home school.
11. If a student is engaging in academic misconduct in an examination, the student must
be informed, preferably in the presence of a witness, that the circumstances will be
reported. The student must be allowed to continue the examination. The details and
time of the incident must be noted on the exam script. Wherever possible, the
4

Procedure 05: 2024 Version 1.1
invigilator must confiscate and retain evidence relating to the alleged academic
misconduct.
12. If, before an allegation has been considered by the Chair of the Board of Examiners,
further allegations relating to the same student are received, the allegations (whether
in examinations and/or coursework) can be treated as concurrent and can be
investigated together.
13. Generative-Artificial Intelligence detection software will not normally be used in the
operation of this procedure, to either evidence allegations of academic misconduct or
as a tool in an investigation of academic misconduct.
14. When considering the allegation of academic misconduct the Chair of the Board of
Examiners must choose one of the following options:
i.

Take no further action: This option must be chosen if there is insufficient
evidence to justify an allegation of academic misconduct.

ii.

Conclude that the student has demonstrated poor academic
practice: This option must be chosen if the student’s coursework contains
examples of poor academic practice that fall short of academic misconduct.
If this option is chosen, a record should be placed in MyBangor (where this is
relevant, or otherwise kept on the student’s file) noting the discussion..

iii.

Conduct an investigation: This option must be chosen if the alleged
academic misconduct is in assessed work, including examinations and
coursework, that:
•

Does not contribute to the overall mark upon which the award is
classified. For example, assessed work at Level 4 in an undergraduate
degree.

•

Amounts to 20 credits or fewer in assessed work that contributes to the
overall mark upon which the award is classified. For example, assessed
work at Level 6 in an undergraduate degree.

The investigation must be conducted as described in Paragraphs 15-21. This
option must not be used if a previous allegation against a student has been
substantiated following an investigation by a school or by a Panel of Enquiry.
iv.

Refer the allegation to a Panel of Enquiry: This option must be chosen
in all of the following situations:
• If a previous allegation against a student has been substantiated
following an investigation by a school or by a Panel of Enquiry.
• The allegation is of collusion, and a previous allegation against at least
one of the students involved has been substantiated following an
investigation by a school or by a Panel of Enquiry.
• The allegation relates to academic misconduct in work amounting to over
20 credits in assessed work that contributes to the overall mark upon
which the award is classified.
When an allegation of academic misconduct is referred, details on the
specific allegation against the student must be included together with
evidence which supports the allegation, which should be indexed and cross
referenced as necessary so that its importance and relevance is clear to the
Panel. The Quality Enhancement Unit can ask for more information before
5

Procedure 05: 2024 Version 1.1
allowing an allegation to be presented to a Panel of Enquiry. Details of any
previous allegations must also be provided, on a separate sheet, so that
these can be considered by a Panel of Enquiry if an allegation is
substantiated. Schools may include on the sheet provided any information
that may be relevant to the Panel of Enquiry when it decides on a penalty.
v.

Where the allegation of academic misconduct relates to a Bangor University
student studying at one of the University’s partner institutions, the initial
allegation must be considered by the Head of School (or equivalent senior
academic member of staff). The options available to the Head of School (or
equivalent) are as set out in section i-iv above.

Procedure for a school investigation by the Chair of the Board of Examiners
15. The Chair of the Board of Examiners must invite the student to present a written
response, by letter or email, to the allegation. The student must respond within 10
working days, where practicably possible.
16. With the exception of information sourced from the use of Generative-Artificial
Intelligence software, the Chair of the Board of Examiners must consider all the
evidence that is available and can consult with academic members of staff. As part of
the investigation, the Chair of the Board of Examiners can invite the student to a
meeting. The student can be accompanied by a member of academic staff, a staff
member or officer of the Students’ Union, or by another student. At the meeting, the
student can be asked questions to verify that the work is their own.
17. The Chair of the Board of Examiners must choose one of the following options:
•
•
•

•

•

Conclude that the allegation of academic misconduct is not proven and that no
further action should be taken.
Conclude that the allegation of academic misconduct is not proven but that the
student has demonstrated poor academic practice. A penalty as described
below, and in Appendix 4 of this document, must be applied.
Instruct examiners to assign a mark ignoring that part of the assessed work
affected by academic misconduct (e.g. plagiarised text). This option is
appropriate where only a small proportion of the work is affected by academic
misconduct.
Award a mark of zero (0%) for the element where academic misconduct
occurred. This option is appropriate where a substantial proportion of the work
is affected by academic misconduct and/or the academic misconduct is
considered to be advertent.
Award a mark of zero (0%) for the module in which academic misconduct
occurred. This option is appropriate where (a) the academic misconduct is
particularly serious or (b) there is evidence of extensive academic misconduct in
most of the assessed elements within a module and the academic misconduct is
considered to be advertent.
No penalty must be imposed that is greater than the award of a mark
of zero (0%) for the module(s) where academic misconduct has been
proven.

6

Procedure 05: 2024 Version 1.1
The Chair of the Board of Examiners must also determine whether
students are permitted to submit work for reassessment (as described
in paragraphs 17-19).
18. If a penalty is imposed (as described in paragraph 17 and Appendix 4) on students in
the first two years of an undergraduate programme (or in the third year of a four year
programme) the Chair of the Board of Examiners must consider whether any
recommendations must be passed to the Senate Examination Board about
reassessment in modules affected by academic misconduct. If no recommendations are
provided, the procedures in the Regulations for Taught Programmes must be applied.
19. If a penalty is imposed (as described in paragraph 17 and Appendix 4) on students in
the final year of an undergraduate programme or students on a postgraduate taught
programme, the Chair of the Board of Examiners must determine whether the student
will be allowed to submit work for reassessment, and which assessed elements of a
module are to be resubmitted. The Chair must consider the potential implications of
the decision on the ability of the student to fulfil the requirements for the award.
20. The Chair of the Board of Examiners must inform the student in writing of the decision
and of the right to appeal within 10 working days, where practicably possible.
21. If an allegation of academic misconduct is upheld the decision must be recorded as a
confidential note on MyBangor (where this is relevant, or otherwise kept on the
student’s file).
Procedure for a University Panel of Enquiry
22. A Panel of Enquiry will be convened by the Quality Enhancement Unit. Panels must be
convened and must not consider the case based only on electronic communication.
23. Students and their Personal Tutor (or relevant member of staff at partner institutions)
must be informed in writing by the Secretary of the Panel of the allegation and that a
Panel of Enquiry will consider the case.
24. The membership of the Panel of Enquiry will consist of:
•
•

Three members of academic staff appointed by the Senate (any one of whom
can act as the Chair). The members must be from outside the student’s school.
The President of the Students’ Union (or nominee).

25. The Secretary of the Panel must:
i.

Inform the members of the Panel of Enquiry of the date, place and time of
the meeting and supply them with details of the allegation and of any
statements or documents.

ii.

Inform the student of the date, place, and time when the Panel of Enquiry
intends to meet and that the student has the right to be represented or
accompanied, to hear all the evidence, to call and question witnesses and to
submit other evidence, including evidence of mitigating circumstances.

iii.

Inform the school that referred the allegation of the date, place, and time
when the Panel of Enquiry intends to meet.

iv.

Send documents to Panel members, the student and school representative.

vi.

Where the Panel of Enquiry relates to a student studying at one of the
University’s international partners arrangements must be made to ensure
7

Procedure 05: 2024 Version 1.1
that, where they wish to do so, that the student can join the meeting
through online means / video conferencing.
26. A student who intends to be accompanied and/or represented must inform the
Secretary of the name of the person accompanying and/or representing in writing a
minimum of 3 full working days before the meeting. Student attendance by online
means / video conferencing is permitted, and they can also send a representative; but
the strength of the connection should be tested by the student beforehand, and a land
line connection should be available as a back-up.
27. The student has the right to seek a postponement of the meeting where there are
mitigating circumstances. Notice of a minimum of 3 full working days is required. A
Panel meeting can only be delayed if the student is able to provide satisfactory
documentary evidence of mitigating circumstances that prevent her/his attendance.
The Secretary must confer with the Chair of the Panel to make a decision as to
whether the mitigating circumstances presented are sufficient to warrant a
postponement of the Panel meeting. The Secretary of the Panel will send all
correspondence relating to the allegation to the student’s email address. When (a) a
student fails to attend the meeting at the appointed time or (b) has not contacted the
Secretary at least 3 full working days before the scheduled time for the Panel meeting
or (c) in the absence of sufficient mitigating circumstances, the Panel meeting will
normally proceed in the absence of the student.
28. Any evidence made available on the date of the Panel meeting, including details of
special circumstances, can only be presented with the permission of the Chair.
29. The functions of the Panel of Enquiry are to:
i.

Consider the evidence submitted to it about the allegation of academic
misconduct.

ii.

Determine whether the allegation has been substantiated. Such a
determination must normally be made on the balance of probabilities.

iii.

Determine, if the allegation is proven, the penalty to be imposed.

30. In cases where two or more students are accused of related offences, such as in the
case of collusion, the Chair can decide to deal with the cases together. However, each
student must be given the opportunity to request that the cases be heard separately.
31. At a Panel of Enquiry:
•

•
•
•

The Chair must:
o Ensure that each member of the Panel, the student and any other
participants are introduced.
o Outline the procedure to be followed at the Panel of Enquiry. Read out
the allegation against the student.
Students must be given an opportunity to state whether they wish to contest
the allegation.
A representative from the school responsible for the module will present the
evidence that supports the allegation.
The student must have the right to be represented or accompanied, to hear all
the evidence regarding the allegation(s), to call and to question any witnesses,
and to submit other evidence. The student can question the school
representative. The Chair can invite contributions from the person
accompanying the student.
8

•

Procedure 05: 2024 Version 1.1
Members of the Panel of Enquiry can ask questions of the student, the Secretary
and of the school representative.

32. The Panel of Enquiry must consider whether the allegation has been substantiated.
The Panel is not required to prove intent on the part of the student to engage in an act
of academic misconduct in order to substantiate the allegation, but additional proof of
intent can be relevant to the Panel in arriving at an appropriate penalty.
33. The Panel of Enquiry must not normally consider information sourced from GenerativeArtificial Intelligence detection software.
34. The Panel of Enquiry must not normally be informed, before deciding whether an
allegation is substantiated, of any evidence of previously substantiated allegations of
academic misconduct. However, the Panel must be informed before determining the
penalty. In exceptional cases, evidence of previous substantiated acts of academic
misconduct can be disclosed prior to the verdict of the Panel where such evidence:
i.
ii.

Rebuts a claim of previous good character made by the student or their
representative.
Is relevant to the allegation under consideration (other than merely showing
that the student had a disposition to commit the acts alleged) and that its
prejudicial effect does not outweigh its probative value.

35. The penalties will normally be as defined in Appendix 4, but the Panel can apply other
penalties at its discretion and based on previous penalties/precedents. These penalties
can include assigning a mark ignoring that part of the assessed work affected by
academic misconduct, awarding a mark of zero (0%) for the module in which academic
misconduct occurred, decreasing the degree classification by one class, and exclusion
from the University.
36. Where an allegation has been proven and the Panel is concerned that this can affect
the student’s suitability for practice/ fitness to practise on a professional programme,
the case can be referred for consideration under the Suitability / Fitness to Practise
procedure (or its equivalent).
37. Where the Panel issues a formal reprimand, the Panel can recommend that the student
must receive advice from an appropriate member of academic staff to ensure that the
cause of the action (e.g. poor academic practice) is discussed with the student and
that any future repeat offence cannot then be classed as ‘inadvertent’.
38. The Chair of the Panel of Enquiry can inform the student orally of the Panel’s decision.
The Secretary must notify the student in writing of the Panel of Enquiry’s decision and,
where the allegation is proven, of the penalty to be imposed and of the student’s right
to appeal.
39. Where the allegation has been proven, the Secretary must inform the student’s school
so that the Board of Examiners can determine the student’s overall result taking into
account the penalty imposed by the Panel of Enquiry.
Examination Processes
40. If a case of alleged academic misconduct is under investigation at the time of the
9

Procedure 05: 2024 Version 1.1
meeting of a Board of Examiners, the Board must defer consideration of the student’s
results until the Chair of the Board of Examiners or Panel of Enquiry has considered the
case.
41. Boards of Examiners have authority to cancel a result previously published and to
publish a supplementary pass-list, if academic misconduct is proven after the
publication of the original pass-list.
Appeals Against decision of Chair of Board of Examiners
42. Appeals against the decision of the Chair of Board of Examiners will be considered by
the University’s Panel of Enquiry. Appeals must be submitted in writing to
academicintegrity@bangor.ac.uk within 10 working days, where practicably possible, of
the date on which the student receives notification of the decision. A Panel of Enquiry
will be convened to discuss the Appeal. The Panel of Enquiry will hear the Appeal as
per any other academic misconduct case and will decide on whether to uphold the
Appeal, uphold the decision of the Chair of the Board of Examiners, or uphold the
allegation and amend the penalty imposed by the Chair of the Board of Examiners.
Appeals against decision of University’s Panel of Enquiry
43. Appeals against the decision of a Panel of Enquiry will be considered by the Pro ViceChancellor (Education and Student Experience) or their nominee. Appeals must be
submitted in writing to academicintegrity@bangor.ac.uk within 10 working days, where
practicably possible, of the date on which the student receives notification of the
decision.
44. Appeals will only be considered on the following grounds:
•

Defects or irregularities in the conduct of the procedure used to consider the
allegation of academic misconduct and where defects, irregularities or advice could
have affected the decision.

•

Special circumstances that relate to the decision. The appellant must explain why
such special circumstances were not made known as part of the process of
considering the allegation. Where a student could have reported special
circumstances, but did not do so, those circumstances cannot subsequently be cited
as grounds for appeal.

45. The Pro Vice-Chancellor will investigate the concerns in order to gather full and
relevant information before making a judgment on the appeal.
46. The Pro Vice-Chancellor can reach one of the following options:
i.

That the appeal is not upheld.

ii.

That the original decision must be amended.

iii.

That the appeal must be referred to a Panel of Enquiry with members that
have had no previous involvement with the case.

47. Appeals against the decision of a Panel of Enquiry, convened under paragraph 46iii will
not normally be permitted.
48. When the appeals procedure has been completed a student can submit a complaint to
the OIA. A student can complain to the OIA if they are, or were, a student registered
at Bangor University, or if they were studying for an award granted by Bangor
10

Procedure 05: 2024 Version 1.1
University. The term “student” includes trainees, apprentices and those studying at a
campus abroad for an award from Bangor University
The Office of the Independent Adjudicator for Higher Education (OIA) runs an
independent scheme to review student complaints. Bangor University is a member of
this scheme. If a student is unhappy with the outcome from Bangor University, they
may be able to ask the OIA to review their case. They can find more information about
making a complaint to the OIA, what it can and cannot look at and what it can do to
put things right here: https://www.oiahe.org.uk/students.
Students normally need to have completed this procedure before they complain to the
OIA. Bangor University will send a letter called a ‘Completion of Procedures Letter’
when they have reached the end of these processes and there are no further steps
they can take internally. If the complaint/appeal is not upheld, Bangor University will
issue a Completion of Procedures Letter automatically. If the complaint/appeal is
upheld or partly upheld a student can still ask for a Completion of Procedures Letter
from Bangor University if they want one. They can find more information about
Completion of Procedures Letters and when they should expect to receive one here:
https://www.oiahe.org.uk/providers/completion-of-procedures-letters.
To bring a complaint to the OIA, you need to submit a completed OIA Complaint Form
within 12 months of the date of Bangor University’s final decision (usually the date of
the Completion of Procedures Letter), and you will normally need to send the OIA your
Completion of Procedures Letter. A Scheme Application Form can be downloaded from
the OIA website www.oiahe.org.uk.

11

Procedure 05: 2024 Version 1.1
Appendix 1 School and Staff Responsibilities
1. The Head of School must make sure that mechanisms exist within the school to train
all staff who mark students’ work on matters related to academic misconduct, to
promoting academic integrity and to identify training needs.
2. Staff must be made aware:
a. Of the need for understanding of, and support for, students who commit
academic misconduct because of external reasons e.g. stress, feeling unable to
seek support, lack of study skills, poor time management, lack of confidence to
express one’s own ideas, lack of understanding of assignment requirements,
disabilities (known or unknown), health or personal issues, language difficulties,
and cultural variations;
b. That any mitigation applies to the sanctions imposed after a finding of academic
misconduct and not to the decision as to whether academic misconduct has
occurred;
c. Of the QAA guidelines on Contracting to Cheat in Higher Education;
Of the existence of the major copywriting and contract cheating ‘essay
bank/mill’ sites, and the need to ensure that any known advertising from such
sites is immediately taken down and / or Digital Services are informed so that
the sources can be blocked;
3. Each school must have a designated Academic Misconduct Officer.
4. Staff should:
a. Consider how students are targeted by essay banks or mills and seek to
emphasise transferable skills gained through examinations and assignments that
can be utilised in a students’ future career.
b. Bring to the attention of students the known approaches undertaken by essay
banks or mills which will include falsely sympathetic statements, friendly pop-up
chats, fake testimonials, multiple company names giving the appearance of a
free market but hiding market majorities, guarantees and flashing rewards to
attract new and repeat customers.
c. Discourage the use of proofreading, translating using unauthorized methods,
and use of other external services that may lead to a heavily edited or rewritten
work by those other than the student;
d. Encourage students to report such approaches to tutors or other University
staff.
Staff should signpost students to the Study Skills Centre who can help both student
and staff writers to improve their note-taking, exam and presentation skills, planning
and time management skills, maths and statistics skills, use of and referencing
evidence, locating relevant sources, essay/report structure and style, developing an
argument, critical reading and writing, self-editing skills, and using feedback and
assessment criteria, in a confidential one-to-one setting.
Staff should be aware that the Library offers modules, workshops, and small group or
individual appointments to provide assistance with utilising appropriate resources,
guidance on search techniques, strategies for undertaking good quality research,
advice on plagiarism and referencing, using referencing tools like Mendeley, support
with systematic reviews, copyright, and getting published. Engagement and attendance
12

Procedure 05: 2024 Version 1.1
are highest when sessions are run in conjunction with tutors.
5. Members of staff who mark students’ work are responsible for identifying plagiarism
and academic misconduct and can use whatever methods are deemed appropriate and
any specific procedures adopted by the school (in particular see Appendix 3 regarding
Turnitin) to raise awareness of academic misconduct, and academic integrity.
6. All student handbooks must include statements about academic misconduct.
Handbooks must also provide details of the support offered by schools and the
University to students who are in any doubt about academic misconduct, or who
require assistance with writing techniques.
7. At the beginning of each module, guidance must be provided on expectations relating
to any academic activity where students are required to work together. Students must
be informed explicitly about the extent to which collaboration is either required or
forbidden.
8. It must not be assumed that students enter the University with an existing knowledge
of academic conventions, of what academic misconduct is, or of how they can avoid it.
Instructions about the use of primary and secondary sources, bibliographical
techniques, referencing and avoiding self-plagiarism must be presented in clear and
unambiguous language to all students. The instructions must include as many
examples as possible drawn from the subject being studied. Opportunities for students
to test whether they are committing plagiarism are considered to be good practice, for
example, by allowing students to submit a draft version of their work into Turnitin.
9. For distance-learning students, and Bangor University registered students who are
studying at one of the University’s UK or international partners schools must provide
clear guidelines of what academic misconduct is, or of how they can avoid it. Academic
misconduct must be discussed in residential courses, study groups or other support
meetings.
10. The first semester period of each student’s study period must be regarded as
developmental, providing opportunities to encourage and develop good academic
practices. Incidences of poor academic practice must be dealt with as sympathetically
as possible, accompanied by support from academic staff and/or personal tutors, to
ensure that the student understands how further incidences could be avoided.
11. Particular attention must be paid to the possibility of plagiarism in the marking of first
assignments for postgraduate courses, where very limited opportunities exist for
remedial action. For students on taught Master’s courses, procedures must allow the
first written submission to be used developmentally, notwithstanding the fact that the
work can contribute to the final assessment. This can be achieved by:
•

Assigning a relatively small number of marks to the assignment.

•

Allowing an immediate resubmission where students have failed to comply with
good practice.

12. Instruct students to complete and submit the Generative-Artificial Intelligence
Declaration coversheet for all appropriate assessments, in addition to cover sheets for
assessed work that include a section where the student declares that the work is their
own (subject to any specific guidance on collaborative work affecting specific pieces of
work).
13. Schools must publicise the support services that are available to students, including the
Study Skills Centre, and must reassure students that advice can be sought from
13

Procedure 05: 2024 Version 1.1
academic and support staff at any stage in their studies.
14. Assignments must be designed to encourage critical thinking while minimizing the
opportunity for academic misconduct, including self-plagiarism. For example,
assignments could expect students to solve problems or develop a hypothesis rather
than to review information. Similarly, asking students to write for a different audience
or in a different format will reduce the opportunity to simply reproduce published
information.
15. Schools must ensure that students are given guidelines on how to correctly reference
material, both in the text and in the bibliography. They must be provided with any
subject-specific conventions regarding style/format of referencing.
16. Schools must provide students with guidance on any subject- or discipline-specific
examples of academic misconduct. Where reasonably practical, this must place
particular emphasis on examples other than those described in general guidelines on
academic misconduct that are relevant to a subject- or discipline (e.g. unfair use of
generative artificial intelligence; misuse of translation software).
17. Operate under the guiding principle set out at the start of this procedure.

14

Procedure 05: 2024 Version 1.1
Appendix 2 - Students’ Responsibilities
1. Students must read and consider all guidance on academic misconduct provided by the
University and schools.
2. Referencing other people's work demonstrates background reading and research and
strengthens any arguments presented by students’ in their own work. Such reading
and research will be rewarded, but students must not copy another’s work or use
another’s work without acknowledgement.
3. Paraphrasing another’s work without acknowledgement is considered to be plagiarism.
This includes making minor changes to somebody else’s work by substituting words or
deleting a few words. The sources of any materials that have been translated from the
original into the language in which the assessment is submitted must also be
acknowledged.
4. The best way to avoid plagiarism is to start assignments early and to ensure that the
source of every piece of information contained in work produced for assessment is
cited (including written and oral sources, images and tables of results). The only
exception is obvious sources. The source is 'obvious' if the information is common
knowledge either generally, or within some specific field of enquiry, e.g. 'The Norman
Conquest occurred in 1066'. Sources of information include published sources, such as
a book, periodical, newspaper, TV, radio, and internet. The source of unpublished
information, for example, from a third-party must also be stated.
5. Where the work(s) of an author is quoted in several places, the exact source of the
quotation must be given every time it is paraphrased or cited. If the ideas of several
authors are quoted, paraphrased or summarised: it is not sufficient simply to state
sources at the end of the assessed work. Each individual idea must be attributed to its
author(s) in the relevant place(s) in the text where it is mentioned.
6. Students must not re-use work for which credit has already been achieved (unless
specific permission to do this has been granted). This can be called self-plagiarism.
7. It is wrong to use other people’s data without their permission, unless that data has
appeared in the public domain. It is acceptable to re-analyse data from a previouslypublished study but the source of the original data must be acknowledged. It is not
acceptable to use data from other sources, other students (unless collected as part of
approved group work) or members of staff without permission. Even when data has
been used with permission, the source of data must always be acknowledged.
8. Pay close attention to subject- or discipline-specific guidance provided by their School
regarding academic misconduct and the use of translation software in submitted work.
9. Work under the guiding principle set out at the start of this procedure and make
acknowledgements in submitted work as required by the University and/or their
subject or discipline (e.g. to sources, methods, translation, use of generative artificial
intelligence software)

15

Procedure 05: 2024 Version 1.1
Appendix 3 - Detecting academic misconduct and the Turnitin detection
software
1. Schools can employ whatever methods are deemed appropriate in order to detect
academic misconduct. Suspected academic misconduct must be confirmed by
producing documentary evidence that allows, for example, the source of plagiarised
text/material to be identified unambiguously.
2. The University strongly recommends the use of electronic plagiarism detection
systems, currently Turnitin. The University ensures that students’ consent for
submission of work to an electronic plagiarism detection service is obtained.
3. The reports produced by detection software must not be used by themselves to
determine if academic misconduct has taken place. Members of academic staff
responsible for marking assignments must interpret the results to determine whether
an accusation of academic misconduct is to be pursued. Other indicators of academic
misconduct, as outlined in paragraph 4, must also be considered.
4. Staff marking students’ work must use their professional judgement to determine
whether plagiarism, and other forms of academic misconduct, has occurred. Indicators
of academic misconduct include the following:
•

The work, or portions of it, exceed the student’s research or writing abilities, and
can appear as too professional, journalistic or scholarly.

•

The student's paper contains complex or specialised vocabulary, technical terms, or
other words and expressions beyond what would be expected from a student at
that level.

•

The quality of writing is inconsistent. For example, the introduction or conclusion
can be poorly written compared to the body of the paper.

•

The title page, font, references, format, or layout of the paper is inconsistent.

•

There are embedded links, page breaks, or incorrect page numbers in the paper.

•

The topic of the paper is not consistent with the assignment, class lectures, or class
handouts.

•

The bibliography is odd in some way. For example, it can be long, the style used for
the bibliography can be different from the one normally used, the citations are from
older or remote sources, or few of the materials referenced are available in the
University library’s book, journal or electronic collections. It is possible to search the
library catalogue to see if items listed in the bibliography are available to students.

•

The same searching techniques that students use for locating papers on the
internet can also be used to retrieve plagiarised papers. A phrase from a student’s
work can be typed into a search engine to identify sources that have been copied.

•

When considering a student’s work attention must also be given to text that is
similar, though not necessarily identical, to other sources, including the work of
another student. Students are guilty of plagiarism if they have only changed a few
words and phrases, or changed the order of the original’s sentences. Plagiarism
also includes presenting a rewritten version of the original text without citing a
source for any of the ideas or facts.

16

Procedure 05: 2024 Version 1.1
5. Students are allowed to submit work to Turnitin to check for plagiarism before the
work is submitted to be marked. Students must only be prevented from doing this for
an assignment or module if there is a very specific reason.

17

Procedure 05: 2024 Version 1.1
Appendix 4. Typical Penalties for Academic Misconduct Cases Referred to a Panel of Enquiry4
Type of
Academic
Misconduct
AM in
Examinations or
Coursework

Lower Penalty1

Normal Penalties2

Higher Penalties3

•
•
•

•
•

Award 0% for assessed work
Resit/resubmission allowed only if
required and permitted under
University rules
Module mark after resit capped at
30% (Level 4-6) or 40% (Level 7)

•
•

Award 0% for assessed work
Resit/resubmission not permitted
except to redeem failure as a
part-time/external student

•
•

Award 0%
Allow resubmission but mark
capped at 50%

•
•

•

Examiners to reconsider the thesis
and determine whether the thesis,
ignoring defined sections, must be
awarded the degree (or a lower
degree where that option exists)

•

Award 0%
Resubmission of Research
Project not permitted (PG
Certificate or Diploma permitted)
No reconsideration or
resubmission of the thesis is
permitted. Candidate must not
be considered for a lower degree
unless the candidate has already
met the criteria for an exit award
defined for the programme

•

AM in a Master’s
Research Project
(Dissertation)

•

AM in a
Postgraduate
Research thesis

•

Award 0% for assessed work
Resit/resubmission allowed
Mark for assessed work capped
at 40% (Level 4-6) or 50% (Level
7)
Option to allow student to
resubmit without cap but should
the Panel decide on this option
they must provide the school
with an explanation of the
decision
Allow resubmission of the entire
thesis, or only permitting
changes to be made to defined
sections/chapters
Allow resubmission of the thesis,
but only permitting changes to be
made to defined
sections/chapters

•

18

Procedure 05: 2024 Version 1.1
1. The Lower Penalties are applied if one or more of the following apply: actions were inadvertent or due to poor understanding
of University regulations; actions were committed on impulse and were not pre-meditated; academic misconduct is very limited
in relation to amount of work presented; there are relevant personal or other circumstances; and/or the Normal Penalty would
have a disproportionate impact on the student’s profile of marks.
2. The Normal Penalties are applied if one or more of the following apply: the student understands that what they did was
wrong; actions were pre-meditated; academic misconduct has influenced the work presented, but not extensively; and/or there
are no relevant extenuating circumstances.
3. The Higher Penalties are applied if one or more of the following apply: the student shows no remorse or regret for actions;
actions show high degree of pre-meditation and planning; academic misconduct is extensive in relation to amount of work
presented; academic misconduct is repeat offence after prior warning from Panel; there are no relevant extenuating
circumstances; and/or the Normal Penalty does not adequately reflect the offence committed
4. Capping mark at 30% or 40%. If a module is Core – the mark must be capped at 40% (Level 4-6) or 50% (Level 7).
Note: If a student falls between categories, for example is a higher penalty is suggested on the basis of one criterion but a
normal penalty is suggested by another criterion, the higher of the two penalties should be applied.

19
