ACADEMIC INTEGRITY POLICY AND PROCEDURES
Date approved:

28/04/2023 Date policy
will take
effect:

Approving
Authority:

Academic Council

Responsibility:

Registrar, Heads of school

Consultation
undertaken:

Academic Management and Planning Committee (AMPC)

Supporting
documents,
procedures

Continuous Assessment Policy (including coversheet),
https://www.dkit.ie/about-dkit/policies-and-guidelines/academicpolicies.html

& forms

Academic Integrity Report, https://www.dkit.ie/about-dkit/policiesand-guidelines/academic-policies.html

of this policy:
Reference(s)

28/04/2023 Date of
Next
Review:

28/04/2026

Academic Quality Sub-Committee

Plagiarism - how to avoid it,
https://dkit.ie.libguides.com/Plagiarism_How_to_avoid_it/plagiarism
DkIT Library Hub:
https://2022-moodle.dkit.ie/course/view.php?id=3977
Fabrication, https://www.dkit.ie/documents/code-conduct
Cheating, https://www.dkit.ie/examinations/documents-andpolicies/conduct-examinations
Unethical Research,
http://ww2.dkit.ie/about_dkit/documents_and_policies/policies/ethics
_policy

Audience:

Public – accessible to anyone

Category:

Student-Centred Learning, Teaching and Assessment

Page 1 of 15

Version Control and Change History

Version
Control

Date
Effective

1

01/09/2011

Academic Council

(AC:DOC:119:05:01)

None.

2

29/09/2014

Academic Council

(AC:DOC:139:07:01) 

Change in procedure.
Addition of plagiarism penalty grid.

3

29/05/2015

Academic Council

Updated Section 9: Dealing with
breaches of Academic Integrity.
Updated the definitions of minor and
major infringements in Section 5:
Plagiarism.
Updated the procedure in Section 9:
Dealing with Breaches of Academic
Integrity.

Approved By

(AC:DOC:142:10:01)

Amendment(s)





4

20/06/2016

Academic Council



Amended penalty grid (Appendix 1:
Plagiarism Penalty Grid) following
policy implementation review in
March 2016 with Heads of
Department.



Included two appendices:

(AC:DOC:148:10:01)

5

10/12/2021

Academic Council
(AC:DOC:178:11:01)

6

28/04/2023

Academic Council
(Meeting No. 186;
AC:DOC:186:14:03)

o Plagiarism Advisor role
description.
o Guidelines for Staff on the
Conduct of Oral Verification
Interviews.


Updated to include the use of
generative artificial intelligence tools
(e.g. ChatGPT).

Page 2 of 15

Contents
1

PURPOSE OF POLICY ............................................................................................................................................................ 4

2

APPLICATION AND SCOPE ................................................................................................................................................. 4

3

ACADEMIC INTEGRITY ........................................................................................................................................................ 4

4

PLAGIARISM............................................................................................................................................................................ 5

5

FABRICATION ......................................................................................................................................................................... 6

6

CHEATING ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7

7

UN-ETHICAL RESEARCH ..................................................................................................................................................... 7

8

DEALING WITH BREACHES OF ACADEMIC INTEGRITY ........................................................................................... 8

9

ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES..................................................................................................................................... 10

10

APPENDIX 1: PLAGIARISM PENALTY GRID .............................................................................................................. 11

11

APPENDIX 2: PLAGIARISM ADVISOR ROLE DESCRIPTION.................................................................................. 13

12

APPENDIX 3: GUIDELINES FOR STAFF ON THE CONDUCT OF ORAL VERIFICATION INTERVIEWS ...... 14

Page 3 of 15

1

Purpose of Policy
The purpose of this policy is to set out the Institute’s commitment to Academic
Integrity.

2

Application and Scope
The policy set out here applies to all DkIT staff, learners and researchers.

3

Academic Integrity
Dundalk Institute of Technology (DkIT) is dedicated to the highest standards of
scholarship and values honesty of endeavour. Professional integrity is recognised as
one of the most important attributes of an academic community. By displaying
integrity, the community and society can have trust in the Institute and in its
graduates.
Academic Integrity is a key element in the formation of a graduate and is as important
an attribute as any technical skill. There are specific detailed guidelines for ethical
behaviour in each of the professional programmes offered by the Institute but there
are also a number of generic attributes underpinning ethical behaviour. These can be
grouped together as the elements of Academic Integrity.
DkIT recognises that in some instances, due to ignorance or misunderstanding,
learners / researchers may engage in conduct which may bring dishonour to their
studies. Such conduct contravenes the principles of Academic Integrity. This
document identifies some of these practices and outlines the procedures used by the
Institute for investigation of possible contraventions of Academic Integrity.
In general these contraventions fall into four categories:
 Plagiarism;
 Fabrication;
 Cheating;
 Unethical Research;
It is the policy of the Institute in the first instance to train its staff, researchers and
learners on the conventions, rules and regulations pertaining to Academic Integrity.
Such training should be compulsory for first year students and should occur early in
the semester before any assignments are submitted for academic credit. Periodic
training should be available to staff.
It is the responsibility of Departments to ensure that staff and learners are
adequately trained. There is an onus on staff and learners / researchers to be aware
of Institute policies, procedures and guidelines in relation to Academic Integrity and
to adhere to these.
For the purposes of this policy, the following practices have been identified as
potential contraventions of the principles of Academic Integrity. Guidelines and
procedures have been developed in respect of these. Such guidelines, procedures and
policies should be published widely.

Page 4 of 15

Academic
Misconduct

Institute Policy and Procedures

Plagiarism
https://dkit.ie.libguides.com/Plagiarism_How_to_avoid_it/plagiarism
Fabrication

http://ww2.dkit.ie/student_life/regulations/code_of_conduct

Cheating

https://www.dkit.ie/about-dkit/policies-and-guidelines/academic-policies.html (Regulations for the Conduct of
Examinations)

Unethical Research

http://ww2.dkit.ie/about_dkit/documents_and_policies/policies/ethics_policy

Action to be taken by the Institute for breaches of Academic Integrity will be in
conformance with its Student Code of Conduct or Staff Disciplinary Procedures as
appropriate.
4

Plagiarism
This policy and these procedures are closely informed by the Plagiarism Policy of the
National University of Ireland, Galway1, with their kind permission. It is also informed by
the work of Dr Jude Carroll, Oxford Brooks University, UK2. The Plagiarism Penalty Grid is
informed by the Benchmark Plagiarism Tariff which was an output of the AMBeR
Project3in the UK.
All work submitted by learners for assessment purposes, or for written or oral
publication, must be their own work. Where this is informed by the work of others, the
source must be properly referenced using the accepted norms and formats of the
appropriate academic discipline.
See:http://ww2.dkit.ie/student_life/regulations/plagiarism/dkit_referencing_guideli
nes_and_how_to_avoid_plagiarism
Plagiarism is the act of submitting for academic credit someone else’s work as one’s
own, without acknowledging the source and without using accepted referencing
norms. The submission of plagiarised materials is always fraudulent and all suspected
cases will be investigated and dealt with appropriately by the Institute following the
procedures outlined here and with reference to the DkIT Code of Conduct.
Plagiarism is usually associated with the written text, but also extends to other forms
of work, including, but not limited to: drawings, diagrams, charts, flowcharts,
algorithms, computer programmes, performance, concepts and ideas.
Using generative artificial intelligence tools (e.g. ChatGPT) in an assessment unless
explicitly permitted to do so and with proper acknowledgement, is a form of
plagiarism.
Deliberately facilitating plagiarism by permitting another to copy one’s work
contravenes the principles of Academic Integrity.

1 Code of Practice for dealing with Plagiarism

http://www.nuigalway.ie/geography/documents/plagiarism_student_code_of_conduct_nui_galway.pdf [Accessed 26
September 2014]
2 Carroll, Dr J,(2011) Deterring, detecting and dealing with student plagiarism, Carlow Institute of Technology, 25 February.
3 Benchmark Plagiarism Tariff, AMBeR Project (2010), http://www.plagiarismadvice.org/resources/institutionalapproaches/item/tennant-benchmarkreport

Page 5 of 15

In some cases the suspected plagiarism is of minor academic value and / or represents
poor academic practice. Such cases include, but are not limited to:
 apparently innocent misuse of materials;
 inadequate citation such as poor referencing or inappropriate paraphrasing;
 those in which the suspected plagiarism is a small proportion of the work only
and/or an element in a piece of work which makes a small contribution to the
mark for the module
More serious cases are those which may include, but are not limited to:
 purchasing work from another / others and submitting this as one’s own;
 copying multiple paragraphs in full without acknowledgement of the source;
 taking work from the Internet without revealing the source;
 copying all or much of the work of a fellow learner with, or without, his/her
knowledge or consent;
 submitting the same piece of work more than once to gain academic credit;
 cases involving award year learners;
 second and subsequent offence(s) where the learner / researcher has been in
receipt of an earlier written warning.
All incidences of plagiarism, whether minor or major, even where unintentional,
constitute a breach of Academic Integrity and shall be recorded in a Departmental log
and the learner / researcher so advised. Records shall be retained for five years.
5

Fabrication
Learners must be careful when designing, recording and handling experimental data.
Only information in which the learner has confidence may be used in a final report.
The learner must also identify why specific data sets have been ignored in their
conclusions and identify the processes which were used in collating data.
Results may be presented in any of a variety of formats e.g. as text, tables, graphs,
diagrams, photographs, images etc. The term “Results” is intended to convey the
meaning of:
 a physical set of measurements;
 the results of a survey or field study;
 the results of a clinical trial; and
 any other similar activities where evidence is gathered.
The responsibility lies with the learner to ensure that the information presented is as
accurate as possible and that due care has been taken in its production. In each of the
major disciplines, there are established experimental protocols, survey methods and
error handling techniques. It is the responsibility of the learner to be familiar with
the appropriate technique.
Fabrication is understood as the act of presenting information as the results from an
experiment, a trial or a survey which was not carried out. Fabrication includes
presenting results which were not generated by the experiment or survey, i.e.
‘inventing data’. Fabrication also includes the act of deliberately removing,
suppressing or selecting data from any experiment or survey in order to advance a
particular hypothesis.
Fabrication could also include manipulation of images using software or similar, in
order to create an erroneous interpretation. (It is recognized that during the design

Page 6 of 15

of a trial or in setting up phase of an experiment, that spurious results may be
generated and it is legitimate to ignore these, provided the same conditions are
replicated, with different and consistent results). Where results have been knowingly
falsified, the learner is open to charges of fraud and professional misconduct.
It is not fabrication where a learner forms erroneous conclusions from valid data.
Minor cases of fabrication are those in which the suspected fabrication is of minor
academic value and/ or represents poor academic practice. Such cases include, but
are not limited to:
 apparently innocent misuse of a protocol;
 poor understanding of protocol;
 bad experimental technique;
 interpolating and extrapolating from insufficient evidence;
 over enthusiastic inferences without sufficient evidence and in which the
suspected data represents only a small proportion of the work and/or an
element in a piece of work which makes a small contribution to the mark for
the module;
 selection and rejection of material without sufficient justification.
Major cases are those which may include, but are not limited to, for example:
 providing results for an experiment or survey which was not conducted;
 claiming that a result has been verified where it has not been tested;
 deliberately altering results from an experiment or survey;
 fabrication involving an award year learner will always be considered as a major
case;
 selection and rejection of results without plausible justification;
 subsequent offence(s) where the learner has been in receipt of an earlier written
warning
6

Cheating
It is extremely important that examinations and assessments be both fair and
impartial. Any attempt by a learner to subvert the fairness of an examination event is
considered cheating and must be reported. Cheating is a form of deception and relates
solely to the examination process. Cheating is where the learner seeks to gain an
unfair advantage over other learners by having access to material or equipment at a
time or at a place where it is not intended, by the examiner, to be available.
Examples of cheating include but are not limited to:
 Impersonation;
 Use of / or access to telecommunications aids, written materials or data devices
when not explicitly permitted in the context of the examination;
 Reading or attempting to read the material of another learner;
 Acquiring improper knowledge of sight unseen examination questions;
 Accessing restricted material, e.g. tutor guides or sample answers.
All cases of alleged cheating will be dealt with under the Institutes’ Code of Conduct.
See: http://ww2.dkit.ie/student_life/regulations/conduct_of_examinations

7

Un-Ethical Research
Please refer to the Institute’s Ethics Policy.

Page 7 of 15

See: https://www.dkit.ie/health-science/research/research-ethics
8

Dealing with Breaches of Academic Integrity
A number of staff will be identified in each Department as Plagiarism Advisers (see
Appendix 2: Plagiarism Advisor Role Description)and shall form a Plagiarism Panel. These
advisers will be trained in deterring, detecting and dealing with plagiarism. They will
become aware of current best practice guidelines, including current national and
international developments across the Higher Education sector.
Procedure
It is good practice for Schools and Departments to require learners to attach a
declaration (i.e. continuous assessment coversheet) to all submitted work, where
appropriate, indicating that the work is their own. The statement should indicate that
the learner has read and understood these regulations. The purpose of this statement
is to reinforce the importance of Academic Integrity. The Institute reserves the right
to verify the originality of any submitted work.
Once work is submitted learners receive feedback from lecturers in respect of the
submitted work.
The lecturer(s) may employ a variety of mechanisms to verify the originality/
authenticity of the submitted work. Verification may take the form of an oral
verification interview (see Appendix 3: Guidelines for Staff on the Conduct of Oral
Verification Interviews) with the submitting learner or learners, using plagiarism
detection software (e.g. Turnitin), or any other process appropriate to a particular
discipline to safeguard Academic Integrity.
Where, arising from the verification processes outlined above, a suspicion of a breach
of Academic Integrity exists, an Academic Integrity Report is completed by the
lecturer(s), signed by both the learner and lecturer(s) and submitted to the Head of
Department.
In the event of the infringement being deemed by the lecturer(s) to be of little
academic significance, he/she may propose that the matter is resolved informally by
referring the student for training on academic writing and referencing. In order to
make such a decision the lecturer(s) must consult with a Plagiarism Advisor or their
Head of Department and obtain agreement. In such a case the incident is still recorded.
In cases where the incident is to be referred to a Disciplinary Panel, the learner will be
notified, in writing by the Department, of the suspected infringement and provided
with:
 the Academic Integrity Report completed by the lecturer and learner;
 a copy of the allegedly plagiarised work;
 a copy of the original source of the allegedly plagiarised work, where available;
 evidence which may support or establish a breach of Academic Integrity (e.g.
Report generated by Plagiarism Detection Tool; Report of Verification interview
or other report appropriate to the discipline involved).
A Departmental Disciplinary Hearing is convened where a breach of the Academic
Integrity Policy is suspected and its purpose is to establish whether a prima facie
exists. The Departmental Disciplinary is comprised of the following:

Page 8 of 15

 Chair will be a Head of Department or Head of School from another discipline.
The learner is invited to attend the Departmental Disciplinary Hearing.
 Two members of the Institute’s Plagiarism Panel.
A record of the Departmental Disciplinary Hearing will be made using the relevant
sections of the Academic Integrity Report.
The Head of Department, in which the alleged infringement occurs, will present the
evidence to the Departmental Plagiarism Panel to establish whether a prima facie case
exists. This is to give the learner and the panel a clear explanation of what has been
alleged.
The learner will have the right to be accompanied by and assisted at the Departmental
Disciplinary Hearing by a representative. The Chair will make clear to the learner that
the panel may apply penalties if a minor breach of the Academic Integrity Policy is
established or alternatively may refer the matter to the Institute’s Disciplinary
Committee where a major breach is suspected. The panel members are provided with
the following documents:
 the Academic Integrity Report completed by the lecturer and learner;
 a copy of the allegedly plagiarised work;
 a copy of the original source of the allegedly plagiarised work, where available;
 Evidence which may support or establish a breach of Academic Integrity (e.g.
Report generated by Plagiarism Detection Tool; Report of Verification interview
or other report appropriate to the discipline involved).
The learner is given the opportunity to justify the work submitted and is invited to
admit or deny responsibility.
Once both sides have presented their case and answered any questions the Head of
Department in which the alleged infringement occurs and the learner are asked to
leave the room. The members of the Departmental Disciplinary Panel then adjudicate
as to whether there is a case to answer or not.
If a prima facie case is established the Departmental Disciplinary Panel uses the
Plagiarism Penalty Grid provided in Appendix 1 to determine the appropriate penalty.
Breaches scored up to 524 points are considered to be of a minor nature and the
penalty is determined at the Departmental Disciplinary Hearing.
If the points exceed 524 this constitutes a possible major offence and the matter is
referred to the Institute’s Disciplinary Committee who shall deal with the matter in the
same manner as it deals with all breaches of the Institute’s Code of Conduct
(https://www.dkit.ie/documents/code-conduct).
Once the Departmental Disciplinary Panel have concluded their adjudication the Head
of Department and learner will be requested to re-enter the room and the panel
decision only will be communicated to the learner.
The learner will be notified of the panel decision, penalty and appeals procedure if
relevant, in writing by the Chair, within three working days of the Departmental
Disciplinary Hearing.
Where a learner fails to attend the departmental disciplinary hearing, a second hearing
will be convened. Should the learner fail to attend the second convened hearing, the
hearing will proceed in the absence of the learner and a decision will be taken on the
evidence to hand.
Page 9 of 15

During the Academic Integrity process, the relevant sections of the Academic Integrity
Report must be signed by the learner.
In keeping with the Institute’s Code of Conduct, the learner shall be entitled to appeal
a decision to the Registrar.
Records of all proven infringements shall be held by Departments and can be
consulted by lecturing staff and members of the Plagiarism Panel to determine
whether a new case is potentially a second, or subsequent, offence.
Statistical information covering the number of cases referred to Plagiarism Advisers,
the number of formal warnings and other penalties applied by the Departmental
Disciplinary Panel will be collected and collated annually by the Registrar’s Office. This
will inform subsequent modifications to these Regulations and ascertain the
requirement for wider training and information dissemination on this topic.
9

Roles and Responsibilities
It is the policy of the Institute in the first instance to train its staff, researchers and
learners on the conventions, rules and regulations pertaining to Academic Integrity.
Such training should be compulsory for first year students and should occur early in
the semester before any assignments are submitted for academic credit. Periodic
training should be available to staff.
It is the responsibility of Departments to ensure that staff and learners are adequately
trained. There is an onus on staff and learners / researchers to be aware of Institute
policies, procedures and guidelines in relation to Academic Integrity and to adhere to
these.

Page 10 of 15

10 Appendix 1: Plagiarism Penalty Grid
The Plagiarism Penalty tool is a points based grid that attempts to standardise the treatment of
penalties for plagiarism. It also provides institutions with a tool against which they can
benchmark their policy and associated practice.


Each suspected case of plagiarism is scored against a number of criteria (history,
amount/extent, level/stage, value of assignment, additional characteristics) and the
resultant total score is matched against a sliding scale of penalties. The tool is applied in a
two-step process:Step 1: Assign Points Based on CriteriaStep 2: Apply Penalties Based on
Points (Penalty Determination)

Step 1: Assign Points Based on Criteria
History
1st Time

100 points

2nd Time

150 points

3rd / + Time

200 points

Amount/Extent
Below 5% OR less than two sentences

80 points

As above but with critical aspects* plagiarised

105 points

Between 5% and 20% OR more than sentences but not more than two 105 points
paragraphs
As above but with critical aspects* plagiarised

130 points

Between 20% and 50% OR more than sentences but not more than five 130 points
paragraphs
As above but with critical aspects* plagiarised

160 points

Above 50% OR more than 5 paragraphs

160 points

Submission purchased from essay mill or ghost writing service

225 points

*critical aspects are key ideas central to the assignment

Page 11 of 15

Level/stage
1st Year

70 points

Undergraduate (not 1st or final year)

115 points

Final Year/Postgraduate

140 points

Value of Assignment
Standard assignment

30 points

Large project (e.g. final year dissertation, thesis)

150 points

Additional Characteristics
Evidence of deliberate attempt to disguise plagiarism by 40 points
changing words, sentences or references to avoid detection

Step 2: Apply Penalties Based on Points Summative Work
In all cases a formal warning is given and a record made contributing to the student’s previous
history.
Points

Available Penalties (select one)

280
329

– No further action beyond formal warning

330
379

– No further action beyond formal warning

Assignment awarded 0% - resubmission required, with no penalty on mark

Assignment awarded 0% - resubmission required, with no penalty on mark
Assignment awarded 0% - resubmission required but with capped* or
reduced mark

380
479

– Assignment awarded 0% - resubmission required but with capped* or
reduced mark
Assignment awarded 0% - repeat required within current academic year

480
525
525+

– Assignment awarded 0% - repeat required within current academic year
Case referred to Discipline Committee
Case referred to Discipline Committee

*Normally, marks will be capped at the pass mark for the assignment

Page 12 of 15

Formative Work
Points

Available Penalties

280-379

Informal warning

380+

Formal warning, with record made contributing to the student’s
previous history

11 Appendix 2: Plagiarism Advisor Role Description
The role of Plagiarism Advisor has responsibility for:
1. Promoting and embedding the fundamental values of Academic Integrity within the
School/Department and across the Institute, building a Community of Practice as
appropriate.
2. Being aware of current best practice, including national and international developments
across the Higher Education sector relating to Academic Integrity, particularly Plagiarism.
3. Be knowledgeable of the Institute’s Academic Integrity Policy and Procedures.
4. Supporting School/Department(s) with deterring, detecting and dealing with breaches of
Academic Integrity, particularly Plagiarism.
5. Engaging and advising member(s) of teaching staff in a School/Department who suspect a
breach of Academic Integrity, particularly those relating to Plagiarism, and provide
appropriate support and guidance.
6. Participating in Departmental Disciplinary Panels where a breach of the Institute’s
Academic Integrity Policy, particularly those relating to Plagiarism, is suspected.
7. Collaborating with the Head(s) of Department/Section with the Academic Integrity
monitoring reports, particularly those relating to Plagiarism, which are submitted annually
to the Academic Council.
8. Contributing to both the Institute and School/Department/discipline specific Community of
Practice relating to Academic Integrity, particularly relating to Plagiarism.
9. Supporting the School/Department with Plagiarism education in conjunction with other
Institute supports (e.g. Library, Student Learning and Development Centre (SDLC)).
Appointment


Each Department will appoint at least two Plagiarism Advisors.

Page 13 of 15



Expressions of interest to act as a Plagiarism Advisor are accepted at Department level at
any time and training will be provided by the Registrar’s Office.

Register


A list of the current Plagiarism Advisors will be maintained by the Registrar’s Office and
made available to all Schools and Departments in the Institute.

12 Appendix 3: Guidelines for Staff on the Conduct of Oral Verification Interviews
1. Students should be informed in advance of the Oral Verification Interview in the
communication from the module lecturer(s) as follows (as indicated in the notification
templates provided with the Academic Integrity Policy and Procedures):
You are requested to attend an interview on <date> at <time> in <location> to discuss a
suspected infringement of the Institute’s Academic Integrity Policy. I/we may also conduct an
oral verification interview in relation to the submitted work.
2. Where a learner fails to attend the Oral Verification Interview, a second interview will be
arranged. Should the learner fail to attend the second interview, the lecturer(s) will record
the absence in the Academic Integrity Report.
3. If only one lecturer is responsible for the assessment they should ask a colleague(s) to
accompany them during the oral verification interview. The Head of Department should not
be present as they have a specific role at a later stage of the process. The student is entitled
to bring a supporter to the Oral Verification Interview. The supporter will be an observer
only and will not be permitted to answer questions on the student’s behalf.
4. The scope of the Oral Verification Interview should be limited to questions which assess the
students’ knowledge of the subject matter of the relevant assessment. The student may also
be asked to describe how they approached the assessment task and the sources of
information they used. It is advisable that the lecturer(s) should prepare in advance of the
interview and collect relevant facts to support the process.
5. If the lecturer deems that the infringement is of little academic significance then Section 8.5
of the policy applies. Following the Oral Verification Interview, if the lecturer(s) suspect(s)
that the student has breached the Academic Integrity Policy, the relevant part of Section 5
of the Academic Integrity Report is concisely completed. The Chair of the Departmental
Disciplinary Panel will subsequently notify the student in writing of the suspected
infringement (Point 6 in policy) and a Departmental Disciplinary Panel will be convened.
The report of the Oral Verification Interview will become part of the evidence presented to
the Departmental Disciplinary Panel.
6. In cases where a breach of the policy is suspected following an Oral Verification Interview,
a lecturer should not invoke any penalty (academic or otherwise). If an infringement of the
Academic Integrity Policy is suspected, the Head of Department will appoint a Departmental

Page 14 of 15

Disciplinary Panel. It is this panel who will ultimately decide if there has been a breach of
the policy and uses the Plagiarism Penalty Grid to determine a penalty.

Page 15 of 15
