Section B: conduct of assessment

Regulations 11 - 30: Assessment principles; feedback; reasonable adjustments; conduct of exams; oral, peer and resit assessment; academic misconduct.

Regulation 11 Principles of Assessment

The University has Assessment and Feedback Principles and Priorities which guide the principles of assessment at the University.

Assessment and Feedback Principles and Priorities

Regulation 12 Assessment requirements

Course information in the degree programme tables states the learning outcomes, assessment practices and assessment requirements.

Application of the regulation

12.1 The degree programme tables are available online:

Degree Regulations and Programmes of Study

Regulation 13 Passing assessment

Passing a course or degree programme requires attainment of the learning outcomes and may require a specified level of performance or attendance in some or all components.

Application of the regulation

13.1 The course information that is linked to degree programme tables describe the learning outcomes and the means by which they are achieved and demonstrated in assessment.

Degree Regulations and Programmes of Study

13.2 Some degrees have professional or statutory body requirements which are reflected in the learning outcomes and their assessment. Students are informed about these in the statement of assessment (see taught assessment regulation 14).

13.3 Boards of Studies and the relevant College Committee approve the assessment and satisfactory performance requirements for courses and degree programmes before their delivery. Individual course elements and options available to students can change and there are annual changes to degree programme tables and course availability. However, the approval of the relevant College Committee must be obtained if it is exceptionally necessary to change the weighting of assessment of a course after students have entered it; or to change progression, classification or award requirements for a programme after students have entered their honours years or a postgraduate programme.

(a) Before approval can be given, written evidence of the results of consultation with the students must be submitted. Every student affected needs to be informed of the changes and given the opportunity to comment. The expectation is that the College will not approve changes in the face of significant student objections, unless changes are compelled by external factors.

(b) The relevant external examiners must also be informed and consulted.

(c) Students may be given alternative course options, where this is possible. The expectation is that course assessment requirements will not change after students are registered on it.

Regulation 14 Statement of assessment

Students must be given a clear statement of how and when each of their courses and programmes is to be assessed. The required information needs to be issued to students at the relevant point, which may be: at the start of each course; on entry into the honours component of a degree programme; or, at the start of a postgraduate programme.

Application of the regulation

14.1 The statement must include:

(a) how each piece of assessed work contributes to the final assessment, progression decision or classification, outlining relevant weightings;

(b) the arrangements for the moderation of the assessed work;

(c) any methods that the Board of Examiners uses for standard setting;

(d) assessment deadlines and any penalties for late submission;

(e) the duration and format of examinations and in which diet they will be held;

(f) how work will be taken into account by a resit Board of Examiners and the number of permitted resits;

(g) the standards and criteria for entry into honours or for progression to Masters dissertation, where relevant.

14.2 The required information need not be provided in a single assessment statement, but is included in course or programme handbooks, or provided by the School in another format, along with other relevant information about assessment, feedback, good academic practice and the avoidance of plagiarism.

Academic Misconduct

Plagiarism

Regulation 15 Provision of formative feedback

The University has Assessment and Feedback Principles and Priorities which guide practice in feedback. The provision of formative feedback is guided by these principles.

Assessment and Feedback Principles and Priorities

Regulation 16 Feedback deadlines

The University has Assessment and Feedback Principles and Priorities which guide practice in feedback. Feedback deadlines are guided by these principles.

Assessment and Feedback Principles and Priorities

Regulation 17 Assessment deadlines: student responsibilities

It is a student’s responsibility to ascertain and meet their assessment deadlines, including examination times and locations.

Application of the regulation

17.1 The examination timetable is based on students’ course choices. To avoid examination timetabling clashes, it is students’ responsibility to ensure that their record of courses is accurate by the end of week 3 of each semester.

17.2 Students who have a clash in their examination timetable need to contact the Examination Office, Student Administration, through their Student Adviser or Student Support Team, as soon as possible to allow alternative arrangements to be put in place.

Student Administration Exams

17.3 As examinations may be scheduled at any time during the semester, it is students’ responsibility to be available throughout the semester, including the whole of the revision period, examination diet and the resit diet, if the student has scheduled examinations. Examinations will not be scheduled during winter or spring vacations. Occasionally assessments may need to be rescheduled with very little notice. If special circumstances mean that a student is unavailable for the rescheduled assessment, Boards of Examiners may consider using an alternative method to assess the relevant learning outcomes.

Regulation 18 Selective assessment

The selective use of specific assessment methods to help a Board of Examiners reach a decision about an individual student, e.g. on a borderline, is not permitted, unless required to meet a learning adjustment.

Regulation 19 Reasonable adjustments

Reasonable adjustments will be made to assessments for disabled students.

Application of the regulation

19.1 Reasonable adjustments must be determined in advance by the Disability and Learning Support Service (DLSS).They are recorded in the student’s Schedule of Adjustments by the DLSS, which communicates the Schedule of Adjustments to the student, the student’s Student Adviser, the School’s Co-ordinator of Adjustments, Student Administration (if examination adjustments are recommended) and other relevant areas.

19.2 The School’s Co-ordinator of Adjustments (CoA) has responsibility for overseeing the implementation of the Schedule of Adjustments. The Co-ordinator of Adjustments will liaise with academic colleagues who are responsible for putting the adjustments in place in the School.

19.3 The Co-ordinator of Adjustments will liaise with the DLSS should any adjustments require further discussion, clarification or alteration. If there are any amendments to the Schedule of Adjustments the DLSS will communicate these and ensure that the student is informed.

19.4 The DLSS provides examples of reasonable adjustments, deadlines and support:

Disability and Learning Support Service

19.5 Reasonable adjustments can be made for a variety of assessment methods, depending on the needs identified and recorded in the student’s Schedule of Adjustments, e.g. assessed coursework, take-home examinations, online examinations, invigilated examinations. The DLSS supports students in the preparation and review of their Schedule of Adjustments. It is a student’s responsibility to ensure that their Schedule of Adjustments covers all types of assessment methods relevant to their courses. For example, if a student discovers that an aspect of their course is likely to have an impact on their support needs, they should contact the DLSS as soon as possible in case any amendment is required to be made to their Schedule of Adjustments.

19.6 Arrangements can be made via the DLSS for students with temporary injuries or impairments, e.g. broken arm or leg, on the submission of relevant medical information. Students should contact the DLSS as soon as possible to allow the DLSS to determine any relevant adjustments and support.

Regulation 20 Language of assessment: languages other than English or Gaelic

The English language is the usual medium of teaching and assessment at the University of Edinburgh. All work submitted for assessment must be written in the English language, with the following exceptions: dissertations may be submitted in Gaelic (see regulation 21); dissertations and other assessed work may be submitted in the language which is being studied where the relevant course or programme handbook specifies that this is allowable.

Application of the regulation

20.1 Quotations may be given in the language in which they were written.

20.2 In very exceptional circumstances, a candidate may be granted permission to submit a dissertation written in a language other than English, where this is not specified by the relevant course or programme handbook. Approval will only be given in cases where the nature of the research is such that presentation of the research results in the language(s) of the materials under analysis confers significant intellectual advantage to the community of scholars who are expected to comprise the primary audience of the research. Approval to do so must be sought either at the time of admission to the University or no later than by the end of the first year of study, and will not be normally be granted retrospectively. Approval must be given by the appropriate College Committee, which must be satisfied that there are sound academic reasons for the request, and that appropriate arrangements can be made for supervision and examination, including the availability of both internal and external examiners suitably qualified to read and examine the thesis or dissertation in the proposed language of submission.

20.3 Where such approval is given, in addition to the standard requirements, the dissertation should also include a substantial summary written in English, summarising the main arguments, and an abstract in English must also be produced. Where Examiners’ reports are completed in a language other than English, these must be translated into English before submission to the Board of Examiners. Any costs associated with this should be borne by the relevant School.

Regulation 21 Language of assessment: Gaelic

Dissertations submitted for assessment and examination may be submitted in Gaelic.

Application of the regulation

21.1 The University of Edinburgh wishes to accord Gaelic equal respect with English under the terms of the Gaelic Language (Scotland) Act 2005.

21.2 Candidates who wish to submit a dissertation in Gaelic should seek approval to do so as early as possible. Approval must be given by the appropriate College Committee, which must be satisfied that appropriate arrangements can be made for supervision and examination, including the availability of both internal and external examiners suitably qualified to read and examine the dissertation.

21.3 Where such approval is given, in addition to the standard requirements, the dissertation should also include a summary (of approximately 1500 words) written in English, summarising the main arguments, and an abstract in English must also be produced. Where Examiners’ reports are completed in Gaelic, these must be translated into English before submission to the Board of Examiners. Any costs associated with this should be borne by the relevant School.

Regulation 22 Availability of assessment examples

A representative sample of students’ work for each summative assessment needs to be made available for the scrutiny and use of examiners, including External Examiners, where they are making final decisions regarding students’ course results.

Application of the regulation

22.1 If use is made of assessment types which cannot be made available, this should be made explicit to the External Examiner in advance and included in the assessment statement to students.

22.2 The Convener of the Board of Examiners will consider with the External Examiner whether and how to present information on these assessments to the External and the Board of Examiners. It may be appropriate to record some forms of assessment for consultation by the Board, e.g. major pieces of performed work.

Regulation 23 Oral assessment

Oral assessments may only be used to assess all students on a course as part of the assessment of a specific component, such as a dissertation or practical skill.

A minimum of two examiners must be present if 50% or more of a course is assessed orally.

Application of the regulation

23.1 If oral performance is to be assessed the assessment statement (taught assessment regulation 13) must include information on how it is to be assessed.

23.2 Conveners of Boards of Examiners need to make available sufficient information about oral assessments to External Examiners and Boards of Examiners.

23.3 A Bachelor of Nursing with Honours student who fails an honours course, for which a pass is required for professional registration, will be required to resit the examination and/or to resubmit the coursework (see taught assessment regulation 27). If the student does not achieve a pass at resubmission, an oral examination will be scheduled. If the student fails to satisfy the examiners in the oral assessment, professional registration will not be possible and the student will not be awarded the degree of Bachelor of Nursing with Honours but may be eligible for another award.

Regulation 24 Peer and self-assessment

Boards of Examiners may use summative student peer and self-assessment.

Application of the regulation

24.1 The Convener of the Board of Examiners has responsibility for ensuring the robustness of student peer and self-assessment. Where peer and self-assessment is used summatively, students need to receive appropriate support and guidance, which should pay specific attention to the avoidance of inappropriate discrimination.

24.2 External Examiners need to receive sufficient information about and samples of the assessments as evidence on which to base their decisions.

24.3 Resources and publications are available from the Institute for Academic Development:

Institute for Academic Development

Regulation 25 Examination timetable

Students are only permitted to sit examinations at the times and in the venues that are detailed on the relevant examination timetable.

Application of the regulation

25.1 Examinations may be scheduled outside normal University teaching hours.

25.2 Students who believe that religious reasons or participation in elite-level sport prevent them from sitting an examination at the scheduled time or venue should contact their Student Adviser and Student Support Team. Their case is considered by the relevant Dean and Student Administration in consultation with the Convener of the Board of Examiners. Further information regarding flexibility which may be offered to students taking part in elite-level sport is provided in the Performance Sport Policy:

Performance Sport Policy

25.3 A student who is permitted to appear for examination at a time other than that prescribed may have to sit a specially prepared examination paper or alternative method of assessment.

25.4 If examinations are disrupted, for example due to adverse weather conditions, then Boards of Examiners may decide to use an alternative assessment method, rather than rescheduled examinations, to assess the learning outcomes.

25.5 Other than online assessment and assessment opportunities offered via Student Administration, students are not allowed to sit examinations away from Edinburgh.

Regulation 26 Conduct of examinations

Examinations scheduled by Student Administration are conducted in an invigilated environment in accordance with Examination Hall Regulations, which are publicised to students annually.

Application of the regulation

26.1 Student Administration has responsibility for the effective operation of examinations in accordance with the Examination Hall Regulations.

Exam Hall Regulations (pdf)

26.2 All examinations which are in Student Administration’s scheduled examination diet will be invigilated by authorised staff appointed by Student Administration. The Invigilator ensures compliance with the Taught Assessment Regulations in accordance with Invigilation Guidance.

Invigilation Guidance (pdf)

26.3 Examinations that contain practical, oral or performance elements are invigilated by members of academic staff and may be conducted jointly with an External Examiner.

26.4 Take-home examinations and online examinations are subject to the provisions of the Taught Assessment Regulations which are related to examinations but are not subject to the Examination Hall Regulations. Take-home and online examinations are not assessed coursework, and are therefore not subject to extensions, although additional time may be offered to individual students in line with a Schedule of Adjustments.

Regulation 27 Resit assessment

The number of assessment attempts students are entitled to for each course depends upon the type of programme the student is taking and the SCQF level of the course.

Honours undergraduate students are entitled to:

- a maximum of four assessment attempts for courses at Scottish Credit and Qualifications Framework level 7 and 8;
- one assessment attempt for courses at SCQF level 9 to 11 unless Professional, Statutory or Regulatory Body (PSRB) requirements apply, in which case a maximum of four assessment attempts are permitted.

Non-Honours undergraduate students (excluding Visiting Undergraduate Students) are entitled to:

- a maximum of four assessment attempts for courses at SCQF level 7 to 11.

Visiting undergraduate students are entitled to:

- a maximum of two assessment attempts for courses at SCQF level 7 to 11.

Taught postgraduate students are entitled to:

- one assessment attempt for courses at SCQF level 9 to 12 unless specific Professional, Statutory or Regulatory Body (PSRB) requirements apply, in which case a maximum of four assessment attempts are permitted.

Application of the regulation

27.1 Boards of Examiners must publish the requirements for resits for those courses that they are responsible for. Boards must take the same approach to resits for all students on a particular course, except where a student’s previous attempt is a null sit.

27.2 Boards of Examiners must set requirements at resit that are as demanding as those made of students at the first attempt.

27.3 Boards of Examiners will inform students who are required to undertake resit assessment of the format of their resit assessment. Resit methods need not be the same as those used to assess the learning outcomes at the first attempt, but all relevant learning outcomes must be assessed. Resit arrangements must give students a genuine opportunity to pass the course. Boards of Examiners choose between two options to achieve this:

(a) Carry forward any component of assessment (coursework or examination) that has been passed already and require the student to retake the failed element;

(b) Set an assessment covering all learning outcomes for the course, and weight this as 100% of the course result.

27.4 Students are not allowed to resit a course or components of a course that they have passed, unless the relevant Board of Examiners has permitted this under Special Circumstances by granting a null sit for the attempt that the student has passed (see 27.9).

27.5 The four assessment attempts are the initial assessment and a maximum of three further assessment opportunities, of full assessment, examination or coursework only basis, at the next available opportunities. There may be PSRB requirements which mean that fewer than four assessment attempts are permitted.

27.6 The first sitting and subsequent attempts must take place over no more than two academic sessions, unless the relevant College grants an exemption.

27.7 Non-attendance or non-submission is considered an assessment attempt.

27.8 Some Honours programmes require students to pass specified courses at the first attempt in the first or second year in order to progress to Junior Honours. Any such requirements will be specified in the Degree Programme Table or Programme Handbook for the relevant programme.

27.9 Where an assessment attempt has been affected by special circumstances, a Board of Examiners may declare this attempt a null sit. Null sits do not count towards the maximum number of permitted attempts. Where a student receives a lower mark in a subsequent assessment attempt than that achieved in the attempt declared as a null sit, they may be awarded the higher mark for the relevant assessment.

27.10 Re-assessment attempts are not generally permitted for courses at SQCF level 9 and above for Honours and taught postgraduate students since Honours and taught postgraduate programmes permit the award of credit on aggregate (see Taught Assessment Regulations 52, 54, 56, 57). Where resits are permitted for Professional, Statutory or Regulatory Body requirements, any classification decision must use the result obtained on the first attempt.

27.11 The Academic Policy and Regulations Committee decides whether a programme may offer resits which are required for Professional, Statutory or Regulatory Body requirements for courses at SCQF level 9 and above for Honours and taught postgraduate students. This decision is based on a case proposed by the relevant College.

27.12 Students who are subject to immigration control have restrictions on their entitlement to resit as a result of being in the UK on a Student visa. Students on a Student visa can only take a fourth assessment attempt where they have valid special circumstances (in line with the Special Circumstances Policy), and specific additional conditions are met (as outlined below).

If a student on a Student visa does seek a fourth assessment attempt, they should apply for this via the Special Circumstances process. Where the student has valid special circumstances, the relevant Board of Examiners will determine what action to take. Where the Board of Examiners decides to award the student a null sit for the affected assessment attempt, this will not count as one of the four assessment attempts; null sits for any previous attempts are also not counted towards the total permitted attempts. Where the Board does not award a null sit, but wishes to offer the student a fourth assessment attempt, they may only do so where:

i) the student has provided satisfactory ‘greater weight’ evidence of their circumstances (in line with para 6.2 of the Special Circumstances Policy);

ii) the circumstances that had disrupted the student’s previous attempt(s) have been mitigated or no longer apply.

The Student Immigration Service provides advice and guidance to students and staff in relation to the immigration regulations. It is able to support students on Student visas should permission to undertake a fourth assessment attempt affect their visa status (for example, by requiring an extension), and can also support students to understand their immigration status in the event that they are not granted a fourth assessment attempt.

27.13 If repetition of the in-course assessed work is not possible outwith semester time, the student, with the permission of the relevant Head of School, may be allowed to repeat any coursework on its own in the following year. Students who do not receive such permission may be permitted by the relevant Head of School to repeat the course, including examination, in the following year.

27.14 The full range of marks offered by the relevant Common Marking Scheme is available at resit assessment. Resit marks are not capped.

27.15 Where a degree programme’s Honours classification is based on the final year only, students are permitted a maximum of four assessment attempts for courses in non-final years.

27.16 In the case of collaborative degrees, where not otherwise stipulated in the collaborative agreement, any permitted resit attempt must be within two years of the first attempt.

Regulation 28 Late submission of coursework

Students need to submit assessed coursework (including research projects and dissertations) by the published deadline. Where the student meets the criteria for late submission, the Extensions and Special Circumstances Team will consider accepting late submission of up to seven calendar days without applying a penalty.

Application of the regulation

28.1 If assessed coursework is submitted late without an agreed extension to the deadline for an accepted good reason, it will be recorded as late and a penalty will be applied by the School. The penalty applied is a reduction of the mark by 5% of the maximum obtainable mark per calendar day (e.g. a mark of 65% on the Common Marking Scheme scale would be reduced to 60% up to 24 hours later). This applies for up to seven calendar days (or to the time when feedback is given, if this is sooner), after which a mark of zero will be given. The original unreduced mark will be recorded by the School and the student informed of it.

28.2 Schools may choose not to permit the submission of late work for particular components of assessment where the specific assessment and feedback arrangements make it impractical or unfair to other students to do so. If Schools do not permit the submission of late work for particular components of assessment, they must publicise this to students on the relevant course.

28.3 Where Schools accept late submissions of coursework, the Extensions and Special Circumstances Team will consider cases for accepting late submissions up to a maximum of seven calendar days without applying a penalty. Schools will indicate where components of assessment have a maximum permitted extension of less than seven days. This will be in addition to any extensions offered in line with a student’s Schedule of Adjustments. Students are responsible for submitting their requests in advance of the published deadline for the coursework, using the relevant online system.

28.4 The Extensions and Special Circumstances Team decides whether the student has provided an accepted reason to justify an extension.

28.5 Self-certification will provide sufficient evidence in all circumstances. The Extensions and Special Circumstances Team are responsible for ensuring a record is kept of the decision and the information provided by the student with their request.

28.6 Accepted reasons for coursework extensions are unexpected short-term circumstances which are exceptional for the individual student, beyond that student’s control, and which could reasonably be expected to have had an adverse impact on the student’s ability to complete the assessment on time. Accepted reasons may include:

- Recent short-term physical illness or injury;
- Recent short-term mental ill-health;
- A long-term or chronic physical health condition, which has recently worsened temporarily or permanently;
- A long-term or chronic mental health condition, which has recently worsened temporarily or permanently;
- The recent bereavement or serious illness of a person with whom the student has a close relationship;
- The recent breakdown in a long-term relationship, such as a marriage;
- Emergencies involving dependents;

- Job or internship interview at short notice that requires significant time, e.g. due to travel;
- Victim of a crime which is likely to have significant emotional impact;
- Military conflict, natural disaster, or extreme weather conditions;
- Experience of sexual harassment or assault;
- Experience of other forms of harassment;
- Exceptional and significant change in employment commitments, where this is beyond the student’s control;
- Exceptional (i.e. non-routine) caring responsibilities;
- Severe financial difficulties;
- Exposure to a difficult/challenging home environment;
- Significant problems with access to teaching and learning materials, e.g. due to connectivity, power, or equipment issues;
- Catastrophic technical failure preventing submission of an online assessment by the relevant deadline;
- Lack of access to library resources, where there are no viable alternatives.

28.7 In addition to these unexpected circumstances, the Extensions and Special Circumstances Team will also consider requests for coursework extensions in relation to:

- A student’s disability where the student’s Schedule of Adjustments includes relevant provisions;
- Representation in performance sport at an international or national championship level, in line with the University’s Performance Sport Policy:

Performance Sport Policy

28.8 The following are examples of circumstances which are unlikely to be accepted reasons for coursework extensions:

- A long-term or chronic health condition (including mental ill-health or similar ill-health) which has not worsened recently or for which the University has already made a reasonable adjustment;
- A minor short-term illness or injury (e.g. a common cold), which would not reasonably have had a significant adverse impact on the student’s ability to complete the assessment on time;
- Occasional low mood, stress or anxiety;
- Circumstances which were foreseeable or preventable;
- Holidays;
- Pressure of academic work (unless this contributes to ill-health);
- Poor time-management;
- Proximity to other assessments;
- Lack of awareness of dates or times of assessment submission.

28.9 Where a student has a good reason for requiring a coursework extension of more than seven calendar days, the student should apply via the Special Circumstances process to request an alternate deadline. Accepted applications relating solely to extensions of more than seven days can be handled under the “expedited decisions” function of the Special Circumstances Policy (7.6).

Regulation 29 Academic best practice

All work submitted for assessment by students is accepted on the understanding that it is the student’s own effort without falsification of any kind.

Application of the regulation

29.1 Students are expected to offer their own analysis and presentation of information gleaned from research, even when group exercises are carried out.

29.2 Where students rely on reference sources, they should indicate what these are according to the appropriate convention in their discipline. Students are given advice on appropriate referencing in their course.

29.3 Students may be asked to sign a declaration that the work submitted is their own work.

29.4 Students can get advice on studying effectively from the Institute for Academic Development:

Institute for Academic Development: good practice

Regulation 30 Academic misconduct

It is an offence for any student to make use of unfair means in any University assessment, to assist a student to make use of such unfair means, to do anything prejudicial to the good conduct of the assessment, or to impersonate another student or allow another person to impersonate them in an assessment. Any student found to have cheated or attempted to cheat in an assessment may be deemed to have failed that assessment and disciplinary action may be taken.

Application of the regulation

30.1 Marks or grades can only be given for original work by students at the University. Plagiarism is the act of copying or including in one’s own work, without adequate acknowledgement, intentionally or unintentionally, the work of another or one’s own previously assessed original work. It is academically fraudulent and an offence against University discipline. Plagiarism, at whatever stage of a student’s course, whether discovered before or after graduation, may be investigated and dealt with appropriately by the University. The innocent misuse or quotation of material without formal and proper acknowledgement can constitute plagiarism, even when there is no deliberate intent to deceive. Work may be deemed to be plagiarised if it consists of close paraphrasing or unacknowledged summary of a source, as well as word-for-word transcription, or if it involves the use of essays or answers produced by another individual or service. Any failure adequately to acknowledge or properly reference other sources in submitted work could lead to lower marks and to disciplinary action being taken.

30.2 It is academically fraudulent and an offence against the University’s Code of Student Conduct for a student to invent or falsify data, evidence, references, experimental results or other material contributing to any student’s assessed work or for a student knowingly to make use of such material. It is also an offence against University’s Code of Student Conduct for students to collude in the submission of work that is intended for the assessment of individual academic performance or for a student to allow their work to be used by another student for fraudulent purposes.

30.3 Students need to be careful when asking peers to proof-read their work. Proof-readers should only comment on the vocabulary, grammar and general clarity of written English. They should not advise on subject matter or argumentation. Proof-reading and use of translation services may constitute academic misconduct where it includes rewriting or rewording of the student’s original work.

30.4 Students need to be careful when using Generative AI tools. The use of Generative AI tools (such as ChatGPT or others) to generate an assignment (or part of an assignment) and submit this as if were one’s own work will be regarded as academic misconduct and treated as such. Programme and/or course handbooks will provide additional guidance in cases where AI tools might form part of an assessment task. Further guidance on the use of Generative AI tools can be found at:

Guidance for working with Generative AI (“GenAI”) in your studies | Information Services

30.5 Students need to be careful to avoid academic misconduct when submitting group projects and to be clear about their individual contribution to the submission.

30.6 Information on academic misconduct and plagiarism, and how such cases will be handled, is given on the Academic Services website.

Academic Misconduct

30.7 Exam hall regulations (pdf)

This article was published on
2024-07-29
