GLOBAL
STUDENT ACADEMIC
MISCONDUCT POLICY
Approving authority:
Approval date:
Review period:
Responsible Executive:
Responsible Office:
Effective date:
Scope:

The Senate
12 June 2025
Annual
Deputy Principal (Education and Student Life)
University Student Conduct Office, under the Policy and
Governance Division, Governance and Legal Services
September 2025
All Campuses

Contents
Purpose
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

Introduction
Definitions of Academic Misconduct
Categories of Disciplinary Offences
Outcomes and Penalties
Records and Reports
Appeals
Modifications of Policies
Further Information
Tariff of Penalties for Academic Misconduct

PURPOSE
The primary purposes of the University are the advancement and application of knowledge and the education
of its students; its central activities are teaching, learning and research. These purposes can be achieved only
if the members of the University community can live and work together in conditions which permit freedom of
thought and expression within a framework of respect. To achieve and maintain such conditions, and to
ensure academic standards, there are structures and procedures in place ensuring that the necessary steps
can be taken where behaviour falls short of that expected from students.
The academic integrity of the vast majority of the University's students is exemplary. Nevertheless,
unacceptable behaviour can happen, so the University has Student Academic Misconduct Policies that apply
to all undergraduate and postgraduate taught students at the University irrespective of their mode or place of
study.
Research Misconduct is covered under the Research Integrity: Procedures for Investigating Research
Misconduct.
The following Student Academic Misconduct Policy covers academic misconduct and a range of penalties
which can be imposed.
The Student Academic Misconduct Policy protects the University and its community, deterring those who
interfere with its work and activities, and ensures that where necessary, appropriate sanctions can be
imposed. Students explicitly agree to abide by the University's Ordinances, Regulations, Policies, Procedures,
Rules, and Values when they enrol. The policies and procedures of the University apply to all students who
enrol at Heriot-Watt University, regardless of their campus location, or mode of study (for example at an
Approved Learning Partner (ALP), Graduate Apprenticeship (GA), by HW Online or Distance learning).
Students are expected to make themselves familiar with the policies that apply to them. The Policies are
available at the HWU Policy Bank.
The Senate is responsible for regulating the discipline of students at the University. This is achieved through
policies which provide rigorous, fair, transparent, and consistent processes for investigating and considering
reported incidents involving alleged academic misconduct and for imposing penalties where appropriate. The
Student Academic Misconduct Policy (hereinafter referred to as the Policy) outlines specific responsibilities
and actions for appropriate members of staff of the University and appropriate bodies investigating alleged
academic misconduct offences and applying disciplinary penalties.
The University has a duty to investigate all concerns raised regarding potential misconduct, but it also
recognises that these remain allegations until investigations have concluded and outcomes have been
determined. Where the allegations are found not proven, there will be no record of the investigation on a
student’s academic transcript.
Purpose
The purpose of the Policy is to regulate student behaviour to secure the proper working of the University in the
broadest sense. In support of this goal, students are expected always conduct themselves at all times in a
manner which:
i)
ii)
iii)
iv)

Demonstrates respect for staff and fellow students;
Enhances the reputation of the University;
Is sensitive to culturally diverse environments;
Demonstrates active engagement in the learning process, a commitment to University-level study,
and determination to succeed.

The Policy means that:
i)
ii)

Students can be assured that any instances involving alleged academic misconduct will be
investigated and considered under robust, consistent, fair, and transparent procedures and
decision-making processes;
Academic and professional services staff of the University can be assured that procedures are in
place to deal with instances when students do not abide by the University's Ordinances,
Regulations, Policies, Procedures, Rules, Values and expectations, and that appropriate action
will be taken where required.

Objective
The objective of the Policy is to:
i)
ii)
iii)
iv)

Deal with academic misconduct offences in a way which is proportionate to their severity;
Make provision for informality and flexibility in proceedings so that matters can be considered at the
Primary Academic Unit at an early stage where appropriate;
Ensure, as far as possible, that all parties involved are on an equal footing procedurally and able to
participate fully in proceedings;
Avoid delay as far as is compatible with fairness and the proper consideration of the matters involved.

This Policy recognises that the seriousness of academic misconduct varies and sets out a two-layer approach
(refer to Section 4 for details) to dealing with academic misconduct depending on the seriousness of the conduct.
The Policy provides a framework to ensure that academic standards and expectations are met and defines a
framework of penalties which may be imposed for substantiated academic misconduct that are appropriate,
proportionate, and consistent.
In all disciplinary cases, the rules of natural justice (the right to a fair hearing) shall be observed.
The University embraces a positive attitude towards the promotion of equality and diversity. The Student
Academic Misconduct Policy applies equally to all students irrespective of colour, age, disability, ethnic origin,
gender, marital status, civil partnership, nationality, race, religion, or sexual orientation.
The Policy applies to all students at the University. However, with regard to students at the University
studying at Heriot-Watt University Malaysia, the Registrar General Malaysia may issue directions from time to
time under Section 46 of the Private Higher Educational Institution Act 1996 [Act 555].
All disciplinary cases, investigations, communications, and meetings will normally be conducted in English.
Any exceptions will require the written approval of the Chair of the University Discipline Committee prior to
any investigation being undertaken.

1.

INTRODUCTION

1.1

The Senate is responsible for regulating the discipline of students at the University. Regulation A13:
Student Discipline (hereinafter referred to as Regulation A13) sets out the provisions for regulating
student discipline. Any actions under the disciplinary procedures are undertaken on behalf of the Senate
under a structure and system of delegated authority.
Students and staff are expected to make themselves familiar with the Policy that applies to them. The Policies
are available at the HWU Policy Bank.

1.2

Regulation A13 makes provision for the Policies for regulating student discipline.

1.3

A member of staff who reports the incident, or was involved in marking of the assessment, or is the Course
Leader, or where there are any other conflicts of interest, will have no input in the decision-making of the
alleged academic misconduct offence.

1.4

If a staff member ruling in accordance with the Policies is unable to act for any reason a member of staff
shall be nominated to deputise. The member of staff nominated to deputise shall be nominated by the
person for whom they are deputising or by that person’s line manager. A member of staff nominated to
deputise shall not be permitted to nominate a member of staff to deputise on their behalf. If a member of
staff required to make a decision in accordance with the Policies is unable to act for the reason set out in
Paragraph 2.3, the University Discipline Committee shall approve a member of the staff to deputise.

1.5

These Policies apply to all undergraduate and taught postgraduate students at the University. However,
with regard to students at the University studying at Heriot-Watt University Malaysia, the Registrar
General Malaysia may issue directions from time to time under Section 46 of the Private Higher
Educational Institution Act 1996 [Act 555].

1.6

The Senate reserves the right to add to or amend the Regulations and Policies as it deems appropriate
and with immediate effect. Such amendments will be publicised on the University website.

1.7

The University Discipline Committee will oversee the processes outlined in this Policy and, acting with the
delegated authority of the Senate and in consultation with relevant staff, shall be responsible for approving
the nominated members of staff, who, in addition to those specified in the Policy, shall investigate, and
consider alleged cases of academic misconduct.

1.8

All communications with a student will be sent to the student's University email address and/or the
most recent correspondence address held on the student record system.

1.9

Standard of Proof:
In considering alleged academic misconduct disciplinary offences, the standard of proof required is that
it is more likely than not that something is or is not the case (the 'balance of probability', or civil justice)
rather than 'beyond all reasonable doubt' (as in criminal justice).

1.10

The definitions and categories of academic misconduct are set out in Sections 2 and 3.

1.11

The composition of the committees established to consider disciplinary matters is set out in Regulation
A13 Student Discipline.

1.12

In all disciplinary cases, the rules of natural justice (the right to a fair hearing) shall be observed.

1.13

A student against whom an allegation has been made under the Policy may seek the assistance of a
third-party. The University will only deal with a third-party providing assistance to a student where there
is written and signed authorisation by the student to allow this to happen, except with respect to where
a student is under 18 and a responsible person (guardians or parents in case of minor students) is
required. The student remains the responsible person with respect to any allegation under
consideration. The student is not permitted to appoint someone to act on his or her behalf.

1.14

In accordance with existing University and sector-wide practice, students do not have the right to legal
representation under the Policy.

1.15

A student against whom an allegation has been made may wish to access support from the
Student Union Advice Hub or the Student Representative Bodies for students at the Dubai
and Malaysia campuses. If such assistance is sought, it remains the responsibility of the
student to prepare and submit any evidence or statement for consideration and to liaise
directly with the relevant member of staff or body.

1.16

The University monitors and evaluates the effectiveness of its Student Academic
Misconduct Policy regularly to ensure that penalties are fair and functioning as intended and
to consider the types of cases being identified. An anonymous summary of cases and their
outcomes is reported to the Senate on an annual basis.

1.17

For breaches of Research Integrity by postgraduate research students, these will initially be
considered under the Research Integrity Procedures. Those procedures do not currently
form part of the Student Academic Misconduct Policy and are concerned with the handling
and investigation of allegations of research misconduct. Where an allegation of research
misconduct is upheld, action(s) may be taken under those Policies and Procedures to
safeguard research integrity. However, where disciplinary action(s) are appropriate,
procedures will be initiated under the Student Academic Misconduct Policy.

1.18

Breaches of the Research Ethics Policy by undergraduate and postgraduate taught students
will be considered under the Student Academic Misconduct Policy.

2.

DEFINITIONS OF ACADEMIC MISCONDUCT

2.1

This section outlines the definitions and terminologies used in this policy. These definitions
will be used as the agreed Heriot-Watt University (HWU) approach to academic
misconduct.

2.2

The University defines academic misconduct as any action or attempted action that may
result in a student or group of students obtaining an unfair academic advantage in formal
University assessment, or any activity likely to undermine the integrity essential to
scholarship and research. Academic misconduct includes ethical misconduct and includes
any attempt to gain an unfair advantage in an academic assessment (all assessments are
included, for example, examinations, class tests, essays, coursework, dissertations,
research projects, reports, etc.). All reported allegations of academic misconduct are taken
seriously and, where proven, may lead to disciplinary action.

2.3

Academic misconduct is regarded as a breach of University Regulations and where proven
will result in penalties being imposed (as described below). Where allegations are not
proven, the assessment will be returned to the marking process.

2.4

Any attempt by a student to gain an unfair advantage in any type of assessment, including
examinations, will be regarded as a breach of Academic Integrity. The University will not
accept academic misconduct in any form and the seriousness with which cheating is viewed
will be reflected in the penalties which are imposed.

2.5

Any student who knowingly permits another student to plagiarise their work will be regarded
as having breached the University's disciplinary procedures.

2.6

The University recognises the benefits of discussion of assignments requiring a group
response; such activities are normal in any academic community. The offence of
plagiarism takes place when, having had the opportunity of advice and guidance, a student
submits work which they know contains matter taken from other sources and for which no
attribution is given according to the conventions normally adopted in academic writing.
Assessment guidelines will provide students with instructions as to what is acceptable and
authorised and what is not in group assessments. Unless stated otherwise in the
assessment guidelines, the University considers that all members of the group are equally
responsible for the submitted assessment.

2.7

It is duty of academic staff to ensure that they are providing students with fair and ethical
support to achieve their independent learning.

2.8

Guidance on how to avoid plagiarism will be provided for students as part of their induction
to all programmes and throughout their studies. All students will be required to undertake a

mandatory online self-pace short course on academic integrity before they can submit their
first assessment.
2.9

The University reserves the right to utilise electronic plagiarism and similarity detection and
checker systems and, where such systems are available, requires students to make their
submissions through them. The use of these systems allows the student and the University
to check systematically for plagiarism, thus ensuring that all students' work is original.
These systems search the World Wide Web and extensive databases of reference
material and content submitted by others to identify any duplication of submitted work.
Only University approved detection tools should be used by students.

2.10

Any student who during any part of the assessment process copies, steals, or appropriates
the work of another, or who introduces into an examination room any materials or other aids
not explicitly permitted under the rubric of the examination, or who uses other unfair
methods to gain an advantage in an assessment, will be deemed to have breached the
University’s policy on academic misconduct. This applies to all work submitted as part of
the assessment process, in whatever year, and whether produced under formal
examination conditions or as part of a programme of continuous assessment. Any student
who knowingly assists others in this process will also be regarded as being guilty of
academic misconduct.

2.11

With respect to students following a programme offered by the University at a partner
institution, in the case of alleged academic misconduct relating to a University award, the
case must be dealt with by the University.

2.12

The following lists a summary of terminologies that HWU is considering in relation to any
academic misconduct cases:
Terminology

2.13

Definition

Allegation

A concern raised by a member of staff as to whether a piece of work submitted for
assessment is the student’s own. There is no presumption that misconduct has occurred;
the University has an obligation to investigate allegations and determine whether or not
they are proven.

Component

Any part of the assessment that has been referred to Discipline Committees. Academic
misconduct proven in a component (part or whole of an assessed piece of work), in some
instances, regardless of the percentage, may result in the overall course for that semester
being reported as Invalid Grade, and the reassessment of that component will be added to
the other elements of the course assessment(s) at the reassessment diet only.

Invalid Grade
(IG)

Course result of ‘IG’ will be added to a student’s record by the relevant Registry and
Academic Support team only when it has been determined by the relevant Discipline
Committee that an entire course is void. The result of ‘IG’ remains permanently on a
student’s transcript.

Investigation
Pending (IP)

Course result of ‘IP’ will be added to a student’s record by the relevant Registry and
Academic Support team to any course being investigated for suspected academic
misconduct. The result of ‘IP’ will be updated by the relevant Registry and Academic
Support team following the completion of the relevant Discipline Committee’s
investigation, i.e., on receipt of the formal outcome letter issued by the University Student
Conduct Office.

Offence

A case of proven academic misconduct will be referred to as an offence.

Stage

The various levels/progression points within a programme and the year in which a student
is enrolled.

Void

The penalty is providing no credit for the submitted work, e.g., a component of a
coursework or an examination that is under disciplinary investigation. This means the
student will get zero for that component. Depending on the severity of a case, the
committee may impose the voiding of one or more than one course as penalty. As such,
the student who receives this penalty will not receive any marks for those courses, i.e., will
receive an invalid grade (IG) for those courses. As a result, the student will not be able to
get credit for the course since they did not pass it. If the student has exhausted their
opportunities, voiding a course means they may not be able to graduate from the
programme in which they enrolled.

For the purposes of the University's academic misconduct policy plagiarism constitutes

one form of academic misconduct. Plagiarism is defined as the presentation, by a student,
of work for assessment that draws from another source without acknowledgement of that
source.
2.14

Plagiarism may take different forms, such as:
•

Copying and pasting parts or all of resources, digital or otherwise, without clear
acknowledgement.

•

Visual plagiarism: A ‘like for like’ copying of the sum of a design or creative process; or
adjusting or adapting another person’s work, where significant original similarity,
elements or attributes remain that can definitely be attributed to the original work.

•

Verbatim (word-for-word) quotation without clear acknowledgement. This includes
word-for- word translation from non-English resources to English.

•

Inappropriate paraphrasing.

•

Inaccurate citation.

•

Failure to reference.

•

Self-plagiarism, in which a student resubmits work that they originally completed and
submitted for another purpose, without acknowledgment of this. This is regarded as
academic misconduct (unless resubmission was permitted).

2.15

For the purposes of the University's academic misconduct policy collusion occurs where
students work together to complete an assessment, in whole or in part, that should have
been completed independently. Submissions should present a student's own personal
skills and understanding and not seek to take credit for the contributions or knowledge of
another student.

2.16

Collusion may be found in cases where the student works too closely with one or more
individuals to help solve and/or answer an assessed task or question and produce a joint
answer or solution (intentionally or not) to gain an unfair advantage for their own personal
benefit. A student can be guilty of collusion by receiving inappropriate help from one or
more other students, or by providing inappropriate help to one or more other students.
Work which has been submitted for assessment should not be shared.

2.17

Other examples of academic misconduct include but are not limited to the following:
•

Purchasing or Soliciting Material/Work Undertaken by others and presenting it
as their own work: the use of services to produce student work for assessment
(such services may try to persuade students that this is entirely normal and
acceptable practice, when in fact it is misconduct).

•

Selling Material: Selling or offering to sell, by whatever means, material or
using other inducements, to assist a student in producing work for
assessment.

•

Falsifying Data: presenting data based on work which a student claims to have carried
out but which they have invented or obtained by unfair means.

•

Breach of Research Ethics Policy

•

Falsify References: It is a student’s responsibility to ensure that their references list or
bibliography accurately reflects genuine sources from which they got their information from. Failing
to cite and reference correctly, either intentional or unintentional, is a form of academic
misconduct.

•

Misuse of Generative Artificial Intelligence (GenAI) Tools: any suspected misuse of
generative artificial intelligence (GenAI) will be dealt with under this policy. In most

instances misuse of GenAI would fall under the definition of plagiarism (either through
failing to appropriately reference sources (i.e. GenAI) or presenting work that is not
student’s own as if it were) but could also fall under the definition of dishonest practice
where appropriate.
•

Examination Misconduct: unauthorised materials or devices being in the vicinity of a
student during an examination or the use of such materials, the use of electronic devices
not permitted during an examination, or any other conduct not permitted under the
University's Regulations, Policies, and Procedures on examinations.

•

Dishonest Practice: this covers any form of practice which attempts to deceive others, or
obtain any form of academic advantage, but is not specifically identified by the above.

•

Contract Cheating: Heriot-Watt University shares the same definition as what Quality
Assurance Agency (QAA) defines as:
“Contract cheating happens when a third party completes work for a student who then
submits it to an education provider as their own, where such input is not permitted.
Over the last decade, an industry has developed where companies, based in the UK or
overseas, are paid to undertake this work. These companies have become known as
‘essay mills’, although many supply a range of services in addition to essay writing.
Typically, the essay mill will outsource the commissioned work to individual writers
engaged on an ad hoc basis. The term ‘contract cheating’ does not apply exclusively to
essay mills. It can, for example, also refer to situations such as friends or family
members completing assignments for students in whole or in part and does not always
involve a financial relationship”. For more details, refer to this document on the
University policy bank website

3. CATEGORIES OF DISCIPLINARY OFFENCES
3.1.

Offences are categorised below:
3.1.1. Academic misconduct is subdivided as Category A or Category B offences based on
the apparent gravity of the offence and the penalty that could be imposed if an
allegation is substantiated.
Category B offences are those where the penalty will not affect the student’s
progression in their degree, and the offence is for the first time or of a relatively minor
nature. Alleged offences that meet the circumstances listed below may be classified
as Category A offences:
i) A repeat of a previous offence.
ii) Where the penalty to be imposed might require a student to withdraw from the University.
iii) In the case of any student other than a postgraduate student, where an allegation
has been considered as a Category B offence, and where the penalty proposed
might alter the final award.
iv) In the case of a postgraduate student, when an allegation has been considered as
a Category B offence and because of the proposed penalty to be imposed there
would be no opportunity for the student to complete the programme of study
v) Contract cheating allegations.
vi) Inappropriate and unethical usage of Large Language Modules (LLMs) and any
artificial intelligence technology.

3.2.

The University shall have the right to investigate any allegation of academic misconduct
against a student and may take disciplinary action where it decides, on the balance of
probabilities, that a disciplinary offence (as defined above) has been committed.

3.3.

The Procedures and responsibility for the initial consideration of cases in determining the
classification of the offence are set out in a separate Procedures document. It is the duty of
every member of staff, in whose opinion a breach of discipline may have occurred, to report
the incident as soon as possible to the relevant staff member with responsibility for
considering the allegation and the University Student Conduct Office.

3.4.

Based upon the nature of the incident, responsibility for the consideration of cases in

determining the categorisation of an alleged offence is summarised below:
3.4.1. All reports and paperwork must be sent to the USCO. The USCO will log the
referral and arrange for the case to be discussed with the Chair of the School
Discipline Committee to which the course resides.
3.4.2. The Executive Dean of the School in which the course resides will appoint a Chair of
the School Discipline Committee, who will be a member of academic staff in the
School with appropriate experience for the purpose of the procedures. The School
Discipline Committee must have at least two academic members of staff to be
quorate. No member of staff determining the outcome of an alleged academic
misconduct will have had any involvement in the case prior to the referral to the
Committee (e.g., delivery of the course, marking of the assessment, personal tutor of
the student(s), etc.).
3.4.3. The School for which the course resides will conduct the academic misconduct
investigation and determine an appropriate penalty. The home School (determined
by the student’s programme) will be informed of the outcome via the outcome letter
as well as the Chair of the School Discipline Committee and the academic member
of staff who reported the case. Where required, the Student Records and Awards
(SRA) Team will be informed of the outcome (see Section 4.15).
3.5.

Any member of staff reporting a case of alleged academic misconduct should submit an
online Incident Report Form. Please refer to the Procedures document for the relevant links
and details on how to report an allegation.

3.6.

A written record will be maintained of meetings held with students involved in cases of
alleged academic misconduct. Any documentation on a matter of alleged academic
misconduct, including letters, emails, photographs, or reports, may need to be disclosed to
relevant parties during the consideration of a case of alleged academic misconduct and,
therefore, should be factual and balanced. All records of individual cases should be retained
in accordance with the University Records Management Policy.

3.7.

Examples of general evidence and documentation required to be submitted will normally
include:
3.7.1. a copy of the coursework guidelines and assessment criteria issued to students.
3.7.2. any relevant guidance issued to students that you feel may be useful, such as screenshots
of links to referencing guidance provided on the Virtual Learning Environment (VLE) pages,
such as Canvas, or class activities on avoiding academic misconduct.
3.7.3. Plagiarism: the student's work showing plagiarised material; the Turnitin similarity report;
copies of sources of material allegedly plagiarised, where available.
3.7.4. Examination Misconduct: examination script(s); confiscated material; Examination Report
Form from the invigilator.
3.7.5. Collusion: the Turnitin similarity report of the student’s submission, a copy of the student's original
submission as well as a copy of the work alleged to have been copied, these documents
should be annotated to show where the similarities between them are, relevant pages of the
Student Handbook.

3.8.

Original evidence should be submitted. All evidence submitted should be clearly referenced
with relevant extracts marked up appropriately. Additional evidence may be sought at any
stage during the process of consideration of an alleged breach of discipline.

3.9.

Where more than one student is alleged to have committed the same reported offence, for
example, collusion, the evidence of each of the alleged offenders will be disclosed to all
parties, unless deemed not appropriate by the Chair of the relevant Discipline Committee or
the University Student Conduct Office.

3.10.

For the reported alleged academic misconduct cases where more than one student is
reported, all evidence will be redacted or edited as necessary prior to sharing with other

students, in compliance with the University’s Data Protection Policy. Work in which alleged
academic misconduct has been identified should be withdrawn from the assessment
process (including marking) until any investigation into alleged academic misconduct has been
concluded.
3.11.

When an examination irregularity occurs, the student must hand over to the invigilator any
unauthorised material and will normally be permitted to continue with the examination. The
invigilator will retain the confiscated material at the conclusion of the examination and return
it to the Academic Registry with the Examination Report Form. The Invigilator's Handbook
contains guidance for invigilators on the procedures to follow in the event of an examination
irregularity.

3.12.

Any student against whom an allegation of academic misconduct is being made will be
informed if a case is being submitted for consideration.

3.13.

Students who have an allegation of academic misconduct are expected to fully co-operate
with the University during the investigation of an allegation of academic misconduct and
should be prepared to attend meetings if required in connection with the investigation.
Students who do not co-operate may be subject to further disciplinary procedures.

3.14.

A student undertaking a programme of study at an Approved Learning Partner,
collaborative partner, or other recognised partner institution or organisation, or by distance
learning or HW Online learning, is expected to be available for interview, if required, by
means of University’s approved teleconferencing platform.

3.15.

A preliminary review of an alleged academic misconduct offence shall be carried out by
the relevant member of staff as outlined in the Student Academic Misconduct Procedures,
as soon as possible.
The relevant member of staff will either:
3.15.1. Dismiss the allegation; or,
3.15.2. Refer the allegation to the University Student Conduct Office to be considered
by the relevant Discipline Committee.

3.16.

If the member of staff believes that the student(s) should be suspended whilst an
investigation is carried out, they are required to discuss this with the Chair of School
Discipline Committee who shall make such a recommendation through University Student
Conduct Office to the Chair/Vice-Chair of the University Discipline Committee. Such a
suspension should only be imposed if it is considered in the best interests of the University,
its staff or students, or the student concerned, or is necessary to ensure an effective
investigation.

3.17.

Penalties imposed that include voiding a course or part thereof, and allowing
reassessment in the course, will require a student to pay the relevant reassessment fee.
When a course is voided, any further reassessment will be classed as the subsequent
opportunity.

3.18.

Tariffs of penalties for academic misconduct are detailed in Sections 4 and 8. They
provide a point of reference for appropriate staff and bodies with responsibility for
imposing penalties and show recommended penalties based upon the circumstances
presented.

3.19.

Where an academic misconduct allegation is identified near the time of a student’s
graduation, they will not be entitled to receive their award until their case is resolved. A
graduation hold will be placed on their record. Even if the case is concluded in advance of
the next available graduation ceremony, their graduation is likely to be postponed to a
subsequent ceremony to allow time for the necessary academic and administrative
processes to be carried out.

3.20.

Offences of an academic nature identified following graduation and involving academic
misconduct in academic work which contributed towards a University award will be
considered under the University's Student Academic Misconduct Policy. In such cases even
if they have graduated the term 'student' in the Policies shall mean the person against whom
an allegation is being made.

5.

4.

OUTCOMES AND PENALTIES

4.1.

A list of outcomes for Category A and B allegations are set out below:
•

Dismissed. There is no evidence of misconduct, and the assessment is referred back
to the marking process. No record of the allegation of the academic misconduct will be
made on the student’s academic profile in such circumstances.

•

Insufficient evidence. There is insufficient evidence that, on the balance of
probabilities, an act of academic misconduct occurred, and the assessment is referred
back to the marking process. No record of the allegation of the academic misconduct
will be made on the student’s academic profile in such circumstances.

•

Not proven. There is evidence that, on the balance of probabilities, an act of
academic misconduct occurred, was not proven. The assessment is referred back to
the marking process. No record of the allegation of the academic misconduct will be
made on the student’s academic profile in such circumstances.

•

Proven. There is sufficient evidence that, on the balance of probability, academic
misconduct has occurred.

4.2.

A list of penalties and their relevance to Category A and B offences are set out below for
any proven cases and are indicative of the types of penalties which may be applied; other
forms of penalty may also be considered where these are deemed to be more appropriate.

4.3.

A student who is deemed to be in breach of discipline may be liable to one or more of the
following penalties:
4.3.1.

An official written warning (for Category A or Category B offence).

4.3.2.

Exclusion, suspension, or disqualification from assessments or studies (for
Category A offence).

4.3.3.

Where an offence could have resulted in an improvement in academic
performance, reduction in marks/grades awarded in one or more of the
assessments, with re-assessment as a further opportunity. The mark for any
reassessments may be capped (for Category A or Category B offence).

4.3.4.

Where an offence could have resulted in an improvement in academic
performance, annulment (voiding) of one or more of the assessments, with reassessment as a further opportunity. The mark for any reassessments may be
capped (for Category A or Category B offence).

4.3.5.

Where an offence could have resulted in an improvement in academic
performance, annulment (voiding) of one or more of the assessments, with no
reassessment opportunity (for Category A or Category B offence).

4.3.6.

Where an offence could have resulted in an improvement in academic
performance, a reduction in classification of degree to be awarded (for Category A
offence).

4.3.7.

Revocation of an award, having determined that there is good cause to do so
(Category A offence). Revocation of an award also includes the deprivation of all
privileges connected with the award.

4.3.8.

Expulsion from the University (for Category A offence).

RECORDS AND REPORTS
5.1.

Full notes should be taken of all proceedings and the University Student Conduct Office
have the responsibility for recording proceedings and retaining all records.

5.2.

With regard to the nature of reports on proceedings, the following should be observed:
5.2.1. Reports should be sufficiently full to reflect the reasoning by which
conclusions and recommendations have been reached;
5.2.2. Reports should be sufficiently comprehensive to allow the appropriate member of
staff or Committee, depending upon the stage of appeal, to use them as a basis
for any further review of a case;
5.2.3. Reports should be compiled with all due regard for confidentiality.

5.3.

The Clerk to a committee must ensure that minutes and reports on meetings of a
committee are agreed upon by the Chair of the Committee.

5.4.

All records of individual cases should be retained in accordance with the University
Records Management Policy.

5.5.

An annual report on discipline cases considered under the Policies will be
submitted by the University Discipline Committee to the Senate.

6.

APPEALS

6.1.

Appeals against academic misconduct outcomes will follow the University’s Student Discipline Appeals
Policy and Procedures. Appeals against a disciplinary, academic misconduct outcome may be formally
requested, subject to the acceptable grounds for an academic misconduct appeal.

6.2.

In the academic misconduct outcome letter, the University will inform the appellant of their
right to submit an Academic Misconduct Appeal, where appropriate.

6.3.

It is not the purpose of an academic misconduct appeal to re-examine a student academic
misconduct outcome decision, but to ensure that the outcome decision had been
conducted in accordance with the University’s Global Student Academic Misconduct
Policy.
It is the University’s Discipline Committee’s role to use the academic expertise and
judgement of its members to investigate and make decisions to determine if, on the
balance of probability, academic misconduct has occurred, or not, in accordance with the
University’s Global Student Academic Misconduct Policy.

6.4.

The appeal must clearly state the grounds for appeal as specified below and must specify
whether the student accepts the statement of facts held to be proven. The burden of proof
is on the student to demonstrate the reason for the appeal.

6.5.

The students must submit their appeal within ten working days of being sent their formal
academic misconduct outcome letter. An appeal may be rejected if it is not submitted
within the time limit set out above. If the appeal is rejected for this reason the student will
be informed within ten working days of the receipt of their appeal.

6.6.

Students cannot appeal on the basis that they believe the outcome was unfair, that they
were not satisfied or that they were unhappy with the outcome. Appellants have to
demonstrate, with evidence, that the academic misconduct outcome meets one of the
grounds for an academic misconduct appeal to be considered.

6.7.

Students who are found guilty, or proven to have committed, of an act of academic
misconduct can only appeal on the approved grounds below, for which the appellant must
provide direct evidence to support their appeal.

6.8.

Students who admit to the act of academic misconduct (either during or prior to the
Discipline Committee consideration) or accept the statement of facts held to be proven
(that is, that the evidence presented in their case was accurate) cannot subsequently
appeal on the grounds that there was a procedural irregularity in the process undertaken or
that the decision reached was manifestly perverse.

6.9.

Acceptable Grounds for an Academic Misconduct Appeal against the decision by a Discipline
Committee:
Student can only appeal against academic misconduct outcomes on the following grounds.
6.9.1.There was a procedural irregularity in the process undertaken
This does not apply in the case of an offence admitted by a student.
Appeals on this ground which fail to refer to an appropriate or relevant regulation, policy or
procedure will result in the appeal being dismissed without further consideration.
6.9.2.The decision reached was manifestly perverse (exceptionally unacceptable)
This does not apply in the case of an offence admitted by a student.
For such appeals, the appellant must provide evidence of why the decision was manifestly
perverse.
Appeals on the ground that the students feel, in their opinion, that the outcome was unfair, will
result in the appeal being dismissed without further consideration.
6.9.3.The penalty imposed was not commensurate with the seriousness of the offence
For such appeals, the appellant must provide a clear and rationale basis to demonstrate that the
penalty was not within the penalties that can be imposed under the Global Student Academic
Misconduct Policy.
Appeals on the ground that the students feel, in their opinion, that the outcome was unfair, will
result in the appeal being dismissed without further consideration.
6.9.4.

New evidence has been made available that could not be available at the previous
consideration, and which is felt to have a material effect on the decision

For such appeals, the appellant must provide evidence to demonstrate that they were not able to
previously submit their evidence to the applicable Discipline Committee.
In order to be accepted as new evidence there must be a compelling and substantiated reason why
the student had been unable to comply with the requirement to submit all relevant information and
evidence to the applicable Discipline Committee.
Additionally, an appellant who does not respond to the allegation (i.e. does not provide a
statement) or who does not attend a requested meeting shall not be entitled to present new
information after the decision has been made.
Appeals on this ground which fail to provide any evidence to demonstrate that information could
not have been submitted to the relevant Discipline Committee will result in the appeal being
dismissed without further consideration.
6.10.

Un-acceptable Grounds for an Academic Misconduct Appeal against the decision by a Discipline
Committee:
The University will not consider an academic misconduct appeal where it can be shown at any stage
that:
6.10.1.

The academic misconduct appeal is received after the stated deadline for submission of an
appeal which is, ten working days from receiving the outcome of the applicable Discipline
Committee meeting.

6.10.2.

The appeal is a disagreement with the academic judgement of a Discipline Committee which,
based on the balance of probabilities, in assessing the allegation of an act of academic
misconduct, has determined that the case has been proven;

6.10.3.

The appellant has admitted to the act of academic misconduct (either during or prior to the
Discipline Committee consideration) or has accepted the statement of facts held to be
proven (that is, that the evidence presented in their case was accurate), unless there is new
evidence available or that the penalty imposed was manifestly perverse (as described
above);

6.10.4.

The appeal has not been submitted in the correct format, using the correct process or where
mandatory information fields have not completed;

6.10.5.

The appellant did not understand or was not aware of the published assessment regulations
and procedures for a course or programme, as relevant to the case;

6.10.6.

The appellant was not aware of the published procedures for presenting mitigating
circumstances to the University;

6.10.7.

The mitigating circumstances have already been subject to consideration by the applicable
Discipline Committee;

6.10.8.

The academic appeal has been made on new evidence of mitigating circumstances without
there being any relevant written medical or other evidence to show why it should be
considered (as per the University Mitigating Circumstances policy and procedures);

6.10.9.

The evidence to support the appeal is deemed insufficient to verify the circumstances or
grounds claimed;

6.10.10. The appellant’s performance was affected during, or immediately prior to, the assessment
but they did not report the mitigating circumstances to the University at the time, or
immediately after the assessment was submitted;
6.10.11. Evidence put forward to support the appeal can be shown to have been dishonestly acquired
or is itself dishonest;
6.10.12. The substance of the appeal has already been the subject of an appeal by the appellant;
6.10.13. The appeal is about the same consideration or decision, but the appellant has submitted new
grounds;
6.10.14. The appeal is not submitted in an appropriate manner using the prescribed process;
6.10.15. The appeal is considered to be vexatious or frivolous. In such cases the University will
provide reasons in writing to the Student as to why the appeal is considered an abuse of the
process but will not enter into lengthy correspondence about such cases. Any academic
misconduct appeal considered vexatious or frivolous may lead to disciplinary action being
taken by the University.
6.11.

The Appeals Assessor shall consider any request for an Academic Misconduct Appeal and shall have
the following powers:
6.11.1.

To refer the case back to the Chair of the applicable Discipline Committee (School or
University). The Appeals Assessor shall provide recommendations for resolving the appeal.
The Chair will confirm the review outcome within thirty working days of the case being
referred to them;

6.11.2.

To determine that on the basis of the appeal submission, grounds do not exist for the appeal
to be considered and that there is not a case requiring further investigation.

6.11.3.

To determine that the appeal is vexatious or frivolous and to dismiss it as such;

6.11.4.

To determine that the case requires to be considered by the University Discipline Committee;

6.11.5.

In exceptional circumstances, to determine that there is a need for an independent Discipline
Appeal Committee to be set up.

6.12.

The University Student Appeals Office will write to the student within thirty working days of receipt of
the appeal to advise them of the outcome of the appeal, and the reasons for the judgement. The letter
to the student will confirm the right of the student of referral to the Scottish Public Service
Ombudsman.

6.13.

Where a case is to be referred back to the applicable Discipline Committee (University Discipline
Committee for Category A; School Discipline Committee for Category B) any required hearing should
take place as soon as practicably possible and will be handled in accordance with the University’s
Global Student Academic Misconduct Policy.

6.14.

When conducting a hearing into a case referred back to the applicable Discipline Committee, following
an appeal, that Discipline Committee will comprise at least two members of the Committee who have
not previously had any involvement in the case under consideration. This ensures that there is no
conflict of interest in relation to the student(s) involved.

6.15.

The applicable Discipline Committee will receive copies of the documentation provided by the student
as part of their appeal.

6.16.

The clerk of the applicable Discipline Committee will provide the student with written notification of the
decision of the Committee normally within ten working days of the decision being made. Every
reasonable effort will be made to meet this time limit. Where it is not met, the student will receive an
explanation for the delay. The notification shall include a statement of facts held to be proved, the
substance of any findings that such facts constitute a breach of discipline, and a record of any penalty
imposed. The letter to the student will confirm the right of the student of referral to the Scottish Public
Service Ombudsman.

6.17.

Appeals to the Scottish Public Sector Ombudsman (SPSO)
6.17.1. Following the conclusion of the procedures set out above there remains no further recourse to
action through the internal University procedures. However, there is an opportunity for
independent consideration of a case by the Scottish Public Service Ombudsman (SPSO),
which can investigate whether it has been handled appropriately by the University. A student
will be advised, at the appropriate stage in the appeal process, of their right of referral to the
Scottish Public Service Ombudsman (SPSO), providing the appellant with the SPSO contact
details.
6.17.2. The SPSO will only consider complaints about administrative failure. It does not look again at
the substance of an academic misconduct appeal. Before submitting the appeal to the SPSO,
an appellant must have exhausted all the appeal processes in the University and have
received the University’s final response, which will refer to the role of the SPSO. Referral to
the SPSO should take place within twelve months of receipt of the final response.
6.17.3. The SPSO will not normally take forward an appeal which is against academic judgement.
6.17.4. The SPSO will normally only accept an appeal on two grounds. These are:
Ground A: Substantial information directly relevant to the quality of performance in the
assessment which for good reason was not available to the applicable Discipline
Committee when their decision was taken; and,
Ground B: Evidence of irregular procedure, improper conduct, or lack of due diligence in
the conduct of an assessment. For this purpose, ‘conduct of an assessment’ includes the
conduct of the applicable Discipline Committee meeting.
6.17.5. If the SPSO determine that there is a case for the Academic Misconduct Appeal to be
reconsidered by the University, the University Complaints Office will inform the Vice-Principal
and Provost within two working days of receiving the complaint.
6.17.6. The Vice-Principal and Provost will appoint a University Academic Appeals Assessor, who was
not previously involved in the case. The University Academic Misconduct Appeals Assessor
will be asked to investigate the handling of the appeal (Category A or Category B) and write a
response to the SPSO, which will be sent from the University Complaints Office.

6.17.7. In exceptional circumstances, the Vice-Principal and Provost, based on an Appeal against the
University Discipline Committee, or following a referral from the SPSO, may be requested to
convene an Academic Misconduct Appeals Committee. Where an independent Academic
Appeal Committee is required to be set up, the Vice-Principal and Provost will determine the
composition of the Committee. The Committee will follow the Global Student Academic
Misconduct Policy and Procedures.
7.

MODIFICATION OF POLICIES

7.1.

Any modifications made to these Policies will be made in accordance with Regulation A13.

8. FURTHER INFORMATION, HELP and ADVICE
8.1.

This document can be provided in other formats (such as large print, audio, and Braille) if
required by contacting: disability@hw.ac.uk or 00 44 (0) 131 451 3386.

8.2.

Professor Mehdi Nazarinia, Chair of the University Discipline Committee
(m.nazarinia@hw.ac.uk)

8.3.

Dr Craig Kennedy, Vice Chair of the University Discipline Committee and Chair of
the Academic Integrity Group (craig.kennedy@hw.ac.uk)

8.4.

Marc Quinn, Head, Policy and Governance, Governance and Legal Services (m.a.quinn@hw.ac.uk)

8.5.

Dr Cindy Stubbs, Senior Student Conduct Officer, Policy and Governance, Governance
and Legal Services (c.stubbs@hw.ac.uk)

8.6.

The University Student Conduct Office (academicmisconduct@hw.ac.uk)

9. TARIFF OF PENALTIES: THE TARIFF OF PENALTIES PROVIDES EXAMPLES OF
PENALTIES THAT MAY BE IMPOSED FOR PARTICULAR OFFENCES.
Appendix One summarises the different forms of academic misconduct and categories that
Heriot-Watt University recognises, along with the suggested tariff of penalties. Other academic
misconduct types not specifically mentioned in the following tables (e.g., dishonest practice)
will follow comparable tariffs.
The outcome of any disciplinary investigation will be made by the relevant Discipline
Committee (School level or University level), based on the evidence submitted by academics
and/or students and the severity of cases, in line with the tariff of penalties tables provided in
this policy.
The examples of offences and penalties given below are a guide and it is expected that
Schools and the University Discipline Committee will apply the relevant penalty for an offence
which has been proven. Under appropriate circumstances other penalties may be applied
where they can be justified and where, in the case of Category B offences, if required,
approval of the Dean is given.

APPENDIX ONE:
9.1.

Table of tariff for different academic misconduct types

The relevant Discipline Committee will follow Table 9.1 when determining an outcome for forms of plagiarism (including collusion as an example) (as listed above):
Table 9.1 - Penalties relating to proven forms of plagiarism (including collusion as an example).
Discipline Committees (Category A or B)
Penalties:

Formal Warning

Reassessment:

Global College programmes (first offence)
Global College programmes (repeat offence)
Stage 1 or 2 (direct entrants only) – first
offence
PGT Year 1 (direct entrants only), Semester 1
– first offence
Other UG stages (including projects and
dissertations) – first offence
Other PGT stages – first offence

Void the
component1,2,3

Void the entire
course4

Void the entire
course and
other(s)5

May permit reassessment6 at next available
opportunity7 for the component/course(s).
(mark may be capped)
X
X

X
X

X
X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

University Discipline
Committee Decision only
(Category A):
No further assessment
Permitted8,9

X

X
X
X

All PGT and UG Stages - Repeat or Multiple offences
Notes:
• Students who have progressed through the Global College programmes prior to commencing their Undergraduate or Postgraduate
studies will have received Academic Integrity guidance and therefore are not treated as direct entrants.
• This applies to students who have previously been cited for plagiarism, regardless of when the previous offence occurred.
• Applies to students where two or more offences have occurred in the same semester, regardless of whether the first offence investigation
has, or has not, been completed.

X
X

9.2.

Contract Cheating and inappropriate use of Generative Artificial Intelligence (GenAI) tools

The relevant Discipline Committee will follow Table 9.2 when determining an outcome for forms of Contract Cheating and inappropriate use of GenAI tools (as listed
above):
Table 9.2 – Penalties relating to proven forms of Contract Cheating and inappropriate use of GenAI tools
Discipline Committees (Category A or B)
Penalties:
Penalties:

Global College programmes
Stage 1 or 2 (direct entrants only) – first offence
PGT Year 1 (direct entrants only), Semester 1 – first offence
Other UG stages (including projects and dissertations) – first offence
Other PGT stages – first offence
All Stages - Repeat or Multiple offences

Void the entire course

4

Void the entire course
and other(s)5

May permit reassessment6 at next available
opportunity7 for the course(s).
(mark will be capped)
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X

Notes:
• This applies to students who have previously been cited for Contract Cheating and inappropriate use of Generative Artificial Intelligence
(GenAI) tools, regardless of when the previous offence occurred.
• Students who have progressed through the Global College programmes prior to commencing their Undergraduate or Postgraduate
studies will have received Academic Integrity guidance and therefore are not treated as direct entrants.
• Applies to students where two or more offences have occurred in the same semester, regardless of whether the first offence investigation
has, or has not, been completed.

University Discipline
Committee Decision only
(Category A):
No further assessment
Permitted8, 9
X
X
X
X

9.3.

Examination Irregularities

The relevant Discipline Committee will follow Table 9.3 when determining an outcome for forms of exam irregularities (as listed above):
Table 9.3 – Penalties relating to proven forms of Exam Irregularities
Discipline Committees (Category A or B)
Penalties:

Formal Warning

Reassessment:

Reason: Minor Breach of Regulations
relating to examinations (e.g., in possession
of mobile telephone during an examination
with no evidence of use of unauthorised
devices such as phone or smart devices)
Reason: Major Breach of Regulations relating
to examinations (e.g., communicating with
another individual during an examination;
unauthorised material found in an examination
whether evidence or not of use)

Void the
component1,2,3

Void the entire
course4

Void the entire
course and
other(s)5

May permit reassessment at next available
opportunity7 for the component/course(s).
(mark may be capped)

X

X

University Discipline
Committee Decision
only (Category A):
No further assessment
Permitted7,8

X

X

X

X

For minor breaches like unauthorised material brought to the examination, but there is evidence that the unauthorised material was not used, a combination of above penalties, such
as returning for marking (i.e., formal warning), but capping the course or exam mark at pass mark can be imposed.

9.4. Breaches of Research Ethics
The relevant Discipline Committee will follow Table 9.4 when determining an outcome for forms of breaches of research ethics (as listed below):
This tariff of penalties applies to all students and all locations, regardless of where the data is collected from.
If there are more than just an allegation of breach of research ethics involved, the School should contact the University Student Conduct Office or Chair/Vice Chair of
the University Discipline Committee for guidance.
Table 9.4 – Penalties relating to proven forms of Breach of Research Ethics
Discipline Committees (Category A or B)

Penalties:

Formal
Warning

Reassessment:

Void the entire course4

May permit reassessment6 at next available opportunity7
for the course(s)11

Reason: Student does not engage with the
ethics approval process at any point:
• Data collected and no evidence of
seeking approval
Reason: Student does not engage with the
ethics approval process until after
submission:
• Data collected and no evidence of
seeking approval until after the
assessment submission deadline.
Reason: Using unapproved methods of
data collection not in original approval (1)
Due to waiting for approval (i.e., based on
literature review) and not deliberate attempt
to avoid reapproval.

Void the entire course and
other(s)5

X

X

X

University Discipline
Committee only
(Category A)
Void the entire course
and other courses
No further assessment
Permitted8, 9, 10

X

X

X

X

Discipline Committees (Category A or B)

Penalties:

Formal
Warning

Reassessment:

Void the entire course4

May permit reassessment6 at next available opportunity7
for the course(s)11

Reason: Using unapproved methods of
collection not in original approval (2)
• and deliberate attempt to avoid
reapproval.
Reason: Data collected and applied for
approval just before submission deadline
and (1)
• Retrospective approval can be applied.
Conducted research without having valid
approval in advance, but methods in the
ethics approval are followed in the
course.
Reason: Data collected and applied for
approval just before submission deadline
and (2)
• Retrospective approval cannot be
applied.
• Conducted research without having valid
approval in advance, and whilst methods
are followed in the course, they were not
approved

Void the entire course and
other(s)5

X

University Discipline
Committee only
(Category A)
Void the entire course
and other courses
No further assessment
Permitted8, 9, 10

X

X

X

X

X

X

9.5. Appendix one notes
Void the component
1 Where the voided component relates to a piece of coursework, i.e., not an examination component, the common practice will be to apply a void of the component with no
resubmission permitted. However, the relevant Committee can, under exceptional circumstances, allow a resubmission of the voided component (usually for Stage 1 students).
The resubmitted piece of work will be subject to a cap at an appropriate pass mark, i.e., 40% (e.g., undergraduate) or 50% (e.g., postgraduate taught).
2 When a component is void, the common practice will be to apply a cap of marks to the overall course mark. However, the relevant Committee can, under exceptional
circumstances, choose not to apply a cap of the overall course mark.

3 If by voiding a component, the student is required to take the standard reassessment for the course, the reassessment course mark will be subject to cap at an appropriate pass
mark, e.g., 40% (usually undergraduate) or 50% (usually postgraduate taught), decided jointly by the Discipline Committee and the Primary Academic Unit. The reassessment will
usually be at the next available opportunity, and the Primary Academic Units (i.e., Schools) will advise students of the details.

Void the entire course
4 Where a course is void the relevant Committee, may or may not allow reassessment of the course(s). If the reassessment of the voided course(s) is permitted, the overall

course(s) mark will be capped at an appropriate pass mark, e.g., 40% (usually undergraduate) or 50% (usually postgraduate taught), decided jointly by the Discipline Committee
and the Primary Academic Unit. This penalty could still affect progression which can be part of the imposed penalty. The reassessment will usually be at the next available
opportunity, and the Primary Academic Units (i.e., Schools) will advise students of the details.

Void the entire course and other(s)
5 In the case of voiding of more than one course, the additional course to be voided will normally be the highest mark of the student in the same semester. There are, however,
situations that this is not applicable, e.g., programme structure changes, timing of the disciplinary investigation, or the highest mark is from the other semester.
•
•
•
•
•

Any resubmitted work because of a disciplinary penalty, is always subject to cap of the mark for the component or the course at an appropriate pass mark, i.e., 40% or 50%
(for mainly postgraduate taught students).
If the voided course is synoptic, all linked synoptic courses will be voided.
All imposed penalties are at the discretion of the relevant Committee.
University Discipline Committee for very serious academic misconduct allegation cases, can void more than two courses from any prior semester courses or academic years
of studies.
University Discipline Committee for very serious academic misconduct allegation cases, can impose a “No further assessment permitted” penalty.

Reassessment
Reassessment opportunities
6 The University may allow reassessment for less severe offences but will not permit for major offences of contract cheating or and inappropriate use of Generative Artificial

Intelligence (GenAI) tools. If one of the courses is a dissertation, the other course to void can be any taught course(s) from any prior semester courses (usually the course with the
highest mark).
Next available opportunity
7 Students should note this could be in a subsequent academic year, and therefore could result in a break in study, and a significant delay in progressing and graduating. Students
should be aware that ‘capped’ mark could affect a year average, which may indirectly affect their progression and degree classification.

No further assessment Permitted
8 University Discipline Committee, may impose further penalties to those listed under Category B.
9 This may result in student being required to withdraw from the University with a different award to the one for which they were studying or with no award.
10 The UDC can void any number of courses, including those in previous semesters.

Research Ethics Breaches
Reassessment opportunities
11 The reassessment opportunity should be on a new topic (data collection) and the resubmitted assessment’s mark will be capped at an appropriate pass mark.
