Academic Standards and Quality Regulations 2024-25
Academic misconduct
G

ACADEMIC MISCONDUCT

DEFINITIONS
G.1 Academic misconduct includes, but is not restricted to, plagiarism, cheating, collusion,
falsification or fabrication, personation, or bribery as defined below:
i Plagiarism: unacknowledged incorporation in a student’s work either in an examination
or assessment of material derived from the work (published or unpublished) of another.
Plagiarism may, therefore, include:
a. the use of another person’s material without reference or acknowledgement
b. the use of material produced by generative artificial intelligence (GAI) without the
specific permission of the tutor/lecturer
c. where permission to use GAI has been granted, the use of material produced by GAI
must be referenced or acknowledged
d. the use of material produced by paraphrasing tools
e. the summarising of another person’s work by simply changing a few words or altering
the order of presentation without acknowledgement
f. the use of the ideas of another person without acknowledgement of the source
g. copying of the work of another student (with or without that student’s knowledge or
agreement)
h. use of commissioned material presented as the student’s own (e.g. purchasing
material from an essay mill).
For some specific modules / units, information and guidance relating to what may or may
not constitute plagiarism will need to be made explicit to students in student handbooks
or specific module / unit information, e.g. use of mathematical formulae, principles or
theories.
ii Cheating: a student will be deemed to be cheating as a result of any of the following:
a. deliberately acquiring knowledge of the detailed content of an examination in advance
or obtaining a copy of an ‘unseen’ written examination paper in advance of the date
and time for its authorised release
b. communicating with, or copying from, another candidate during an examination
c. permitting another candidate to copy from their examination script
d. being found in possession of any printed, written or electronic material or unauthorised
material during an examination which may contain information relevant to the subjects
of the examination
e. communicating during an examination with any person by any means other than a
properly authorised invigilator or another authorised member of staff
f. impersonating another examination candidate or permitting themselves to be
impersonated
g. undertaking any other action with the intention of gaining an unfair advantage over
other candidates.
iii Collusion: collusion may exist where a student:
a. is complicit with another student in the completion of work which is intended to be
submitted as either that student’s or the other student’s own work
b. knowingly permits another student to copy all or part of their own work and to submit it
as that student’s own work.
Page 1

Academic Standards and Quality Regulations 2024-25
Academic misconduct
iv Falsification or fabrication of data: the presentation of data in laboratory reports, projects
etc based on work falsely presented as having been carried out by the student; obtained
by unfair means; or to present fictitious results.
v Personation: the assumption by a student of the identity of another person with the intent
to deceive or gain unfair advantage.
vi Bribery: the paying, offering or attempted exchange of an inducement for information or
material intended to advantage the recipient in an assessment.
PREVENTION
G.2 At the start of each academic session, students will be advised about acceptable and
unacceptable forms of work, and made aware of the referencing standards which they will
be expected to use. Students will be encouraged to develop study techniques which allow
them clearly to identify sources used and ideas acknowledged. Advice about academic
misconduct should be repeated prior to submission deadlines for projects, coursework and
dissertations. In addition, all student handbooks should include a link to the academic
misconduct regulations.
G.3 The university subscribes to an externally hosted software program that may be used for
originality checking, anonymous marking and peer review of students’ text based work (see
guidance at www.uhi.ac.uk/en/students/your-study-tools). Originality checkers assist staff in
assessing potential instances of plagiarism. They must be used in accordance with the
Originality Checking Policy to ensure that students are not disadvantaged, and students will
be advised by tutors if they are to be used. Students are reminded that they are required to
comply with this policy as a condition of enrolment.
GUIDELINES
G.4 A student should:
a. complete their assessed work by themselves, in their own words and using their own
notes, figures or rough workings (except where group work specifically forms part of the
assessment)
b. acknowledge fully any sources used in accordance with the referencing system used. A
student may refer to their own work submitted for their current or any previous
programme, but (to avoid self-plagiarism) this must be referenced in the same way as
any other text
c. endeavour to ensure that their work is not available to copy by other students (with or
without permission)
d. check with academic staff if they are in any doubt about proper forms of referencing.
MINOR AND SERIOUS ACADEMIC MISCONDUCT
G.5 The difference between minor and serious cases of academic misconduct is judged
according to the overall risk to the integrity of the assessment process. This might mean
assessment of an individual student’s work; for example, if an essay was plagiarised, it may
not be possible to judge whether a student has met the learning outcomes of a module.
Alternatively, the assessment process for a whole cohort of students might be compromised
if a student obtains and shares an exam paper.

Page 2

Academic Standards and Quality Regulations 2024-25
Academic misconduct
INDICATIVE PENALTY IN CASES OF PLAGIARISM (TAUGHT PROVISION)
G.6 The following guidance is indicative only, and the penalty to be applied in each case will be
determined through the formal investigation process. Other factors will be considered as
well as the proportion of the assessment which has been plagiarised.
Reduce mark by:
Proportion of
Level 7
Level 8
Level 9
Level 10
plagiarised text
Less than 5%
ie up to 125 words in a
-5%
-10%
-15%
-20%
2,500-word essay
Between 5-15%
ie 125-375 words in a
-10%
-20%
-30%
-40%
2,500-word essay
More than 15%
ie more than 375 words
of a 2,500-word essay
Fail
Fail
Fail
Fail
(plagiarised text may or
may not be continuous)
Table 1: Indicative penalty in cases of plagiarism (taught provision)

Level 11
-20%

-40%

Fail

APPLICATION TO SQA PROVISION
G.7 The university’s ‘Centre and candidate malpractice and maladministration policy and
procedure for SQA provision’ provides staff and students with a clear framework within which
to work and sets out the university’s definition of candidate malpractice, what it is and how
it may arise. It provides advice and guidance on how staff and students can minimise the
risk of candidate malpractice and what to do should candidate malpractice be suspected. All
cases of suspected candidate malpractice are progressed in accordance with the
university’s academic misconduct procedure.

Page 3
