Contents
1

Introduction ........................................................................................................................................1

2

Academic Integrity Statement ............................................................................................................1

3

Academic Misconduct ........................................................................................................................1
3.1

Plagiarism ...................................................................................................................................2

3.2

Falsification v...............................................................................................................................2

3.3

Contract Cheating .......................................................................................................................3

3.4

Generative Artificial Intelligence (GenAI) .....................................................................................3

4

Academic Integrity and Student Responsibilities.................................................................................3

5

Suspected Incidences of Academic Misconduct .................................................................................5

6

Recording & Reporting .......................................................................................................................7

7

Policy Management ...........................................................................................................................7

8

References ........................................................................................................................................8

MHSB Approved May 2026

1

Introduction

Academic integrity is a shared responsibility across the entire university community. RCSI recognises that
academic integrity is essential to maintaining the standards of education, research and professional
practice expected of a health sciences university. This is supported through the provision of clear policies,
the availability of academic integrity training and resources for both staff and students, and institutional
reporting mechanisms.
The purpose of this policy is to set out RCSI’s arrangements and supports for enabling students/learners*
to understand and value academic integrity; and to provide a framework for effective, fair, consistent, an d
timely processes in the event of an allegation of academic misconduct being made against a student. The
policy includes the pathways for investigating an allegation of academic misconduct against a student, at
School and University level.
(*The terms “student” and “learner” are used interchangeably and refers to both undergraduate students
and postgraduate scholars and the term “student(s)” or “learner(s)” in this policy applies to either category
of student or learner as appropriate)
This policy, and any associated procedures, apply to all work submitted for assessment by all
students/learners registered to RCSI, on all taught and research programmes.
2

Academic Integrity Statement

RCSI, as a health sciences university, espouses the highest standards of professionalism among its
students both at undergraduate and postgraduate level – the showing of respect for the work
of others and acting with honesty and responsibility in preparing and submitting coursework and
completing examinations are key components of professionalism and underpin all academic activities.
Academic integrity is defined as “the commitment to and demonstration of honest and moral behaviour in
an academic setting by the enrolled learner”. i
It involves compliance by all RCSI enrolled undergraduate and postgraduate students with ethical and
professional principles, standards, practices and a consistent system of values, that serves as guidance
for making decisions and taking actions in education, research and scholarship. ii
The six fundamental values for academic integrity as identified by the International Centre for Academic
Integrity (2021) are honesty, trust, fairness, respect, responsibility and courage. iii
Responsibility for demonstrating academic integrity lies with the enrolled learner, and this includes:
“compliance with ethical and professional principles, standards and practices and consistent system of values
that serves as guidance for making decisions and taking actions in education, research and scholarship”. iv
Academic integrity is relevant to all areas of academic endeavour undertaken by the enrolled learner.
This includes, but is not limited to, all activities related to the achievement of academic credit for awards; all
methods of learning practice including in the classroom, research, online, distance and work-based learning; in
all methods and forms of assessment including examinations and various forms of continuous assessment and in
academic scholarship.
3

Academic Misconduct

Any behaviour or action which contravenes academic integrity and breaches its fundamental values of
honesty, trust, fairness, respect, responsibility and courage is considered to constitute Academic
Misconduct. Academic misconduct is any attempt to seek unfair advantage in relation to any academic
activity including through unauthorised content generation.

Academic Integrity Policy

1

Unauthorised content generation is “the production of academic work, in whole or in part, for academic
credit, progression or award, whether or not a payment or other favour is involved, using unapproved or
undeclared human or technological assistance”. i
Examples of academic misconduct include, but are not limited to:
•

Plagiarism

•

Cheating in any forum or form

•

Misrepresentation of research (e.g. data falsification and fabrication of data)

•

Contract cheating

•

Purchase or any unauthorised procurement of examination material

•

Breaches of the Examinations and Assessment Regulations

•

Impersonation

•

Collusion

•

Unauthorised use of generative artificial intelligence (GenAI)

•

Any other act which dishonestly uses information to gain academic credit.

3.1
Plagiarism
The unacknowledged inclusion, whether intentional or unintentional in any form of assessment for a programme
of study of material without due acknowledgement of its original source.
AI-empowered plagiarism is “the use of AI tools to generate text that closely mimics existing sources without
proper attribution” ii
It may include but is not limited to the following: iii
•

Presenting in your own name, work authored by another person or entity, such as other students,
friends or family (with or without permission), or work purchased through any source or given to
you by another person or entity iv, including organisations such as essay mills. The original source
may be in written form or in any other media (for example, audio or video);

•

Presenting ideas, theories, concepts, methodologies or data (including research data) from the
work of another without due acknowledgement;

•

Presenting text, digital work (e.g. computer code or programs), video recordings or images copied
with only minor changes from sources such as the internet, the output of GenAI, books, journals or
any other media, without due acknowledgement;

•

Paraphrasing (i.e. putting a passage or idea from another source into your own words), without
due acknowledgement of the source;

•

Failing to include appropriate citation of all original sources;

•

Representing collaborative work as solely your own;

•

Presenting work for an assignment which has also been submitted (in part or whole) for another
assignment at RCSI or another institution (i.e. self-plagiarism).

3.2
Falsification v
The presenting or making use of fictitious, altered or misrepresented data, evidence, references, citations or
experimental results and includes the use of GenAI created content or output that is fabricated or

Academic Integrity Policy

2

“hallucinated” by it. It also covers documents submitted or used when seeking accommodations, including
through Exceptional Circumstances, Appeals or other university procedures, or any other information that
could be used to gain an unfair academic advantage.
3.3
Contract Cheating
Contract cheating is a form of academic misconduct when a person uses an undeclared and/or unauthorised
third party, online or directly, to assist them to produce work for academic credit or progression, whether or
not payment or other favour is involved.vi Contract cheating services include ghost-writing and essay mills.
3.4
Generative Artificial Intelligence (GenAI)
Artificial Intelligence refers to systems that appear to have “intelligent behaviour by analysing their
environment and taking actions – with some degree of autonomy- to achieve specific goals”. vii
Gen AI tools automatically generate content in response to prompts written in natural-language conversational
interfaces and can be used to transform, produce or generate any kind of content such as text, images, art,
music or programming code. Different technologies, including machine learning and neural networks, are used
to develop the capabilities of these tools. viii, ix
Unauthorised use of Gen AI includes but is not limited to the use of a Gen AI tool to generate any form of
submitted work that a learner submits without proper acknowledgment of that tool’s use in its generation.

4

Academic Integrity and Student Responsibilities

The purpose of assessment, both formative and summative, is to support learning, ascertain learner
understanding and demonstrate the achievement of specific learning outcomes by that learner. It is the
responsibility of the enrolled learner to ensure that all submitted work for assessment purposes in an
academic setting, which includes but is not limited to text, graphics, tables, formulae, results or any
representation of ideas in print, electronic or any other media, in addition to artefacts, computer software and
algorithms, does not constitute unauthorised content generation and correctly acknowledges the source of any
data which is not original to the learner. x
Learners are authors of any work they submit and bear responsibility for its content, accuracy and integrity. In
the completion of any work submitted for assessment the learner is responsible for critiquing its output in terms
of logic, consistency, accuracy and bias. This includes where GenAI is used as authorised.
All students must be willing to provide a declaration with their submission that the work they are submitting is
their own; that there is no unauthorised content generation, no unacknowledged use of another person’s
work; and that the work has not been previously submitted by the student or anyone else.
Where such a declaration is not provided as requested, the individual School or Academic Unit may delay
grading of the submission until it is received. If the declaration is received after the deadline submission, the
usual penalty for late submission of an assignment may be applied.
Where GenAI use is permitted, any such declaration by a learner should enable those assessing it to evaluate
the authenticity and quality of the work being submitted. Such a declaration should specify the exact name
and version of the GenAI system(s) used, a clear description of how those system(s) were used, the
prompting strategy used and specify the steps taken to validate the system’s outputs. xi
Students must not mislead an examiner by submitting work that suggests that the information gathered and
analysed was their own when this was not the case.
Students need to be aware that legislation pertains in Ireland which allows students to be prosecuted for
breaches of academic integrity, specifically the provision or advertising of cheating services. Section 43A of
the Qualifications and Quality Assurance (Education and Training) Act 2012 as amended specifically
empowers the Quality and Qualifications Ireland (QQI) agency to prosecute those who facilitate academic
cheating. The provisions cover: impersonation; provision of or advertising of cheating services and the
publishing of advertisement for cheating. QQI is responsible for bringing prosecutions in respect of these

Academic Integrity Policy

3

offences.
The provision of the necessary support, encouragement and learning opportunities is essential if the integrity,
reputation and culture of academic honesty within RCSI is to be maintained and students are to commit to and
pursue their studies in accordance with the principles which underpin academic integrity. In addition to this
policy, there are various supports available to students including:
i.

RCSI online Academic Integrity resource

ii.

The RCSI Examination & Assessment Regulations

iii. The RCSI Library’s guides and tutorials including those on EndNote®, Referencing and GenAI
iv. The Marks & Standards for the programme they are completing (as appropriate)
v.

Undergraduate and Postgraduate Student Codes of Conduct

vi. Professionalism In the Health Sciences module (Foundation year medicine and
physiotherapy)
vii. RCSI Generative Artificial Intelligence (AI) Usage Policy
viii. RCSI guidance on the ethical use of artificial intelligence in learning, teaching and
assessment
ix. RCSI Undergraduate Student Policy on the Dissemination of Research Outputs, Authorship
and Use of the RCSI Affiliation
Any individual statement(s) or resources introduced locally by a School/Academic Unit to support its
students to demonstrate academic integrity and avoid academic misconduct.
If a student is in doubt as to what constitutes academic integrity, they are encouraged to seek advice and
guidance from a member of the academic staff.
The RCSI Academic Council requires all students to successfully complete the RCSI online Academic Integrity
resource on at least one occasion while completing their studies. Individual Schools/Academic Units may
mandate their students to successfully complete the resource on more than one occasion.
It is important to acknowledge that not all suspected incidences of academic misconduct are intentional.
RCSI acknowledges that students are learners of varying abilities and the skills of appropriate scholarly
research and referencing require time to learn. It is further acknowledged that some students come from
different educational cultures with varying perceptions and accepted styles of referencing and
acknowledging original work. These students may require time to learn what is required to demonstrate
academic integrity as it applies to higher education in Ireland.
Notwithstanding the various resources available, some students at the commencement of their educational
journey at RCSI may unintentionally fail to fulfil the required standards of academic integrity. Where it
becomes apparent that students in the early stages of their programme of studies or research are not learning
as expected, a supportive approach to addressing their shortcomings with regard to demonstrating academic
integrity will be adopted by the University.
While completing programmes within the university, learners may undertake placements in various settings
including those which are patient-facing. The completion of any activity, including the provision of patient care
or the completion of any assignment, by a learner while on placement must be in accordance with the
required standards of academic integrity set out in this policy. In particular, the use of AI for any placement
activity must be in accordance with both this policy and approved by the student’s supervisor or equivalent in
the relevant placement setting.

Academic Integrity Policy

4

5

Suspected Incidences of Academic Misconduct

Any behaviour or action which contravenes academic integrity (including that which constitutes unauthorised
content generation) and breaches its fundamental values of honesty, trust, fairness, respect, responsibility and
courage, is considered to constitute Academic Misconduct.
RCSI reserves the right to avail of any technological or other means available to it to detect academic
misconduct in respect of any assessment or other academic activity undertaken by any of its students.
Where a suspected incidence of academic misconduct occurs during an examination, it will be addressed in
accordance with the University’s Examinations & Assessment Regulations. Suspected incidences of academic
misconduct by any student other than in an examination setting will in the first instance be investigated in
accordance with the provisions of this policy.
Where a suspected incidence of academic misconduct comes to the attention of any member of the
university’s staff, it must be investigated in consultation with the relevant Programme Director, Cycle Director,
Year Lead or equivalent and with the Module Lead, in accordance with the guidance provided for investigating
suspected Academic Misconduct. As part of the investigation, the student may be asked to participate in an
oral assessment of their work as submitted. Table 1 (below) classifies the response level (Level 1, 2 or 3) for
breaches of academic integrity in accordance with the criteria provided.
The classification of response level identified on a case-by-case basis will determine the further course of
action to be pursued in respect of the suspected breach of academic integrity. The determination of the
relevant response level will be made under the supervision of the relevant Programme Director, Cycle
Director, Year Lead or equivalent in consultation with the Head of School or Academic Unit as appropriate.
The outcome of any investigation may be: no case to answer; a Level 1, 2 or 3 response with or without an
accompanying sanction (e.g. grade penalty) or corrective action (e.g. re-submit assignment). If the suspected
breach appears to warrant a Level 3 response, the matter is referred to Registry for further consideration
under the Disciplinary Regulations. Following the determination of a breach of academic integrity, the
academic unit must report this to Registry using the reporting form provided for this purpose by Registry.
To guide the classification of response level in accordance with Table 1, a breach of academic integrity
associated with academic misconduct of a serious nature involves any behaviour or activity, which would
likely have the effect of more than marginally enhancing the grade or outcome awarded to the student as part
of any associated assessment process. The advice of RCSI Registry may be sought by the relevant
School/Academic Unit in its determination of the appropriate response level in any individual case.
When adjudicating upon any suspected incidence of academic misconduct, it is sufficient to establish that
academic misconduct has occurred based on ‘the balance of probabilities’ standard of proof rather than
‘beyond all reasonable doubt’.” xii
Any determination made in accordance with the provisions of this policy may be reviewed in accordance
with the appeal provisions of the University’s Disciplinary Regulations.

Academic Integrity Policy

5

Table 1 Response Levels to Academic Misconduct
Response Level

Description

Associated Course of Action

Level 1: Poor
academic
practice/conduct

Unintentional breach of Academic Integrity
by a student in the early stages of their
respective
programme
resulting
in
academic misconduct considered to be of a
less serious nature: first occasion. .

Academic Integrity retraining.
Support the student in addressing the
deficiencies
in
their
knowledge,
understanding and awareness of what is
required to demonstrate Academic Integrity
and avoiding committing further acts of
academic misconduct.
A Level 1 response may incur sanctions such
as penalties in respect of the grade awarded
but this is at the discretion of the
School/Academic Unit on a case-by-case
basis.
The School/Academic Unit will advise
Registry for noting the details of each
incidence where a Level 1 response is
applied to an individual student.

Level 2:
Academic
misconduct
(minor
infringement)

Breach of Academic Integrity by a student
resulting
in
academic
misconduct
considered to be of a less serious nature:
first occasion
OR
Breach of Academic Integrity resulting in
academic misconduct considered to be of a
less serious nature where a Level 1
response has previously been applied to
that student.

Academic Integrity retraining.
The School/Academic Unit to determine the
sanction to be applied and the corrective
action to be undertaken by the student within a
specified timeframe, including any penalty in
respect of grade awarded.
Where a Level 2 response is applied to a
student, the School/Academic Unit will advise
Registry of the relevant details for formal
recording in the individual student’s
record.

Level 3:
Severe
academic
misconduct
(major
infringement)

Breach of Academic Integrity Standards by a
student resulting in academic misconduct
considered to be of a serious nature
OR
Breach of Academic Integrity Standards
resulting in academic misconduct where a
Level 2 has previously been applied to the
student OR
Failure by a student to satisfactorily comply

The School/Academic Unit to refer the
alleged breach of academic integrity to
Registry for
referral as appropriate for adjudication by a
committee convened in accordance with the
University’s Disciplinary Regulations.

with an approved course of action identified
under either a Level 1 or Level 2 response.

Academic Integrity Policy

6

6

Recording & Reporting

Registry will maintain a centralised record of all reported cases to enable monitoring, identify trends and facilitate
annual reporting. Anonymised data may be used for institutional and national reporting.

7

Policy Management

This policy will be reviewed in line with national and international best practice, under the oversight of the
Academic Integrity Committee. Reviews will normally take place every three years, or sooner where required
due to legislative changes, developments in technology (including artificial intelligence), or recommendations
arising from quality assurance reviews or audits.

Academic Integrity Policy

7

8 References
Foltynek, T., Bjelobaba, S., Glendinning, I., Khan, Z.R., Santos, R., Pavletic, P. and Kravjar, J., 2023. ENAI Recommendations on the
ethical use of Artificial Intelligence in Education. International Journal for Educational Integrity, 19(1), p.12
ii National Academic Integrity Network (2025). Academic Integrity: National Principles & National Lexicon of Common Terms. Version 2.
Available at https://www.qqi.ie/sites/default/files/2025-12/academic-integrity-principles-and-lexicon-2025.pdf. Accessed April 2026.
iii
University College Dublin (UCD) Student Plagiarism Policy (2021). Available at
https://hub.ucd.ie/usis/W_HU_MENU.P_DOWNLOAD_FILE?p_filename=Student%20Plagiarism%20Policy.pdf&p_parameters=36F8A0A
C5B0D6F23FA1EEB8E7C5668E87D47F894CE813A2C5A31FE1A69D113A3E1C278129BDAF0CFDDCE3164583EBA535B1726FC374
52AFB3B5B1D7378696E7A Accessed April 2026.
iv
The purchasing of work from any such source is prohibited under Section 43A of the Qualifications & Quality Assurance (Education &
Training) Act 2012 as amended by the Amendment Act 2019
v
University College London (UCL). Academic Integrity- Students. Available at https://www.ucl.ac.uk/students/exams-andassessments/academic-integrity. Accessed December 2021
vi
National Academic Integrity Network (2025). Academic Integrity: National Principles & National Lexicon of Common Terms. Version 2.
Available at https://www.qqi.ie/sites/default/files/2025-12/academic-integrity-principles-and-lexicon-2025.pdf. Accessed April 2026.
vii
European Commission (2018) Artificial Intelligence for Europe. European Commission. Brussels. 24 April, 2018. Available at https://eurlex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/ALL/?uri=COM:2018:237:FIN
viii
Foltynek, T., Bjelobaba, S., Glendinning, I., Khan, Z.R., Santos, R., Pavletic, P. and Kravjar, J., 2023. ENAI Recommendations on the
ethical use of Artificial Intelligence in Education. International Journal for Educational Integrity, 19(1), p.12.
ix
Guidance for generative AI in education and research (2023). UNESCO. p8. Available at https://www.unesco.org/en/articles/guidancegenerative-ai-education-and-research.
x
National Academic Integrity Network (2025). Academic Integrity: National Principles & National Lexicon of Common Terms. Version 2.
Available at https://www.qqi.ie/sites/default/files/2025-12/academic-integrity-principles-and-lexicon-2025.pdf. Accessed April 2026.
xi O’Sullivan, James, Colin Lowry, Ross Woods & Tim Conlon. Generative AI in Higher Education Teaching & Learning: Principles for
Ethical AI Adoption. Higher Education Authority, 2025. DOI: 10.82110/qmt6-jw48.
xii
National Academic Integrity Network Framework for Academic Misconduct Investigation and Case Management. QQI. August 2023 (1st
edition). Available at https://www.qqi.ie/sites/default/files/202309/NAIN%20Framework%20for%20%20Academic%20Misconduct%20Investigation%20and%20Case%20Management%202023.pdf.
Accessed April 2026.
i

Academic Integrity Policy

8
