Good academic practice
Document type
Scope (applies to)
Applicability date
Review / Expiry date
Approved date
Approver
Document owner
School / unit
Document status
Information classification
Equality impact assessment
Key terms
Purpose

Policy
Staff and students
29/08/2019
11/12/2028
19/08/2026
Senate Policies
Academic Policy Officer
Education and Student Experience
Published
Public
None
Academic policies/Assessment, examination
and award/Good academic practice
This policy concerns all matters relating to Good
Academic Practice including high principles,
processes, sanctions, record keeping and
anonymity and appeals.

Version Purpose / changes
number

Document
status

Author of
changes, role
and school /
unit

9.5

Updated

Academic Policy June 2026
Officer
(Taught
Degrees)

4 groups of changes
implemented following
approvals in 2025/26. 1)
Updated to clarify
applicability of policy
regarding taught
component of PGR
degrees; 2) Updated to
clarify applicability of
policy regarding Microcredentials; 3) Updated to
further clarify remit of
Provost in relation to PGT
students and cases in
GAP; 4) Updated
following Phase 1 of GAP
review in 2025/26,
effective from AY
2026/27. Academic

Date

misconduct types
updated – Notable
changes are: UUAI,
Contract Cheating, and
Plagiarism combined as
one; Falsification and
False Citation combined
as one; Language
Correction Policy brought
into GAP.
The old version (9.4)
continues to be in force
for the remainder of
2025/26, inclusive of all
submissions due before
end of August 2026.

UNIVERSITY OF ST ANDREWS
POLICY ON GOOD ACADEMIC PRACTICE

Contents
1.

High Principles

2.

What Constitutes Good Academic Practice?

3.

Processes

4.

Sanctions

5.

Record Keeping and Anonymity

6.

Appeals

1. HIGH PRINCIPLES
1. The University of St Andrews expects, requires and promotes a culture of good academic
practice.
2. All students are judged on their performance, and no student is allowed to gain an advantage
unfairly over others.
3. The University recognises and embraces its duty to educate both staff and students in good
academic practice.
4. The University protects the interests of those who engage in good academic practice.
5. The University recognises that not all poor practice is academic misconduct; the distinction
between failure to observe good academic practice and academic misconduct is an academic
judgement.
6. Academic misconduct is treated in a consistent manner across the University.
7. Students are treated as innocent until a case against them has been upheld.
8. The person raising an accusation of academic misconduct will not be responsible for
determining whether the accusation is upheld.
9. In determining whether an accusation of academic misconduct is upheld, absence of intention
to commit misconduct, extenuating circumstances or ignorance of the rules is not a valid
defence. If a case of academic misconduct is upheld, a student will be found to have committed
academic misconduct regardless of any extenuating circumstances. Extenuating circumstances
may however be taken into consideration when determining the sanction for an upheld case of
academic misconduct.
10. The standard of proof that will normally apply in determining whether an accusation of
academic misconduct is upheld is ‘based on the balance of probabilities’.
11. Sanctions on those found to have committed academic misconduct will, as far as possible,
reflect the severity of the offence that has been committed.
12. Any financial, personal or other consequences resulting from a sanction applied are wholly
the responsibility of the student.
13. A student against whom an accusation of academic misconduct has been upheld has the
right of appeal in accordance with the guidelines outlined in the Appeals section of this policy.
14. Data r e la tin g to academic misconduct cases is treated confidentially. Information o n
outcomes is communicated only on a need-to-know basis.
These high principles will guide the University in all cases of academic misconduct. The regulations
do not attempt to define every possible case; in cases that are not explicitly enumerated, the above
principles will be used to determine appropriate actions.
2. WHAT CONSTITUTES GOOD ACADEMIC PRACTICE?
All work submitted by undergraduate and postgraduate students, including those registered on
credit-bearing short courses and micro-credentials, is expected to represent good academic
practice. As outlined by the University’s Training in Good Academic Practice:
Good academic practice is about approaching and completing your academic work with
integrity. Fundamental values of academic integrity include honesty, responsibility,
fairness, justice, and (self) respect for your work, learning and ultimately your degree.
These are the values promoted by the University of St Andrews, the academic community
of which you are a member. As a member of this community you are accessing, sharing
and discussing others' works, concepts and ideas, from which you will develop your own
knowledge.
It is important that within this community all members are judged on their individual
academic abilities, and that no student is allowed unfairly to take advantage over others,

to affect the security and integrity of the assessment process, or to diminish the reliability
and quality of a St Andrews degree. In short, it is important that no student participates
in any form of academic misconduct but that, instead, they develop good academic
practices which promote integrity, character and a work ethic worthy of the awarded
degree. (University of St Andrews, 2018)
The University recognises that it has an obligation to students to make clear to them what constitutes
academic misconduct, and it takes steps to ensure that all newly matriculated students are aware
of both the nature of academic misconduct and the policies the University has in regard to it. In
particular, all newly matriculated students are required to engage in a course on good academic
practice at the start of their studies to familiarise themselves with such practice. The University makes
refresher training available to students at regular intervals throughout their studies.
2.1. Misconduct: academic and non-academic
The University distinguishes between non-academic matters (e.g., misconduct involving damage to
the University’s property or reputation) and academic matters (e.g. allegations of plagiarism). This
policy deals with the latter – the encouragement and assurance of good academic practice. In some
cases however, the boundary between academic and non-academic misconduct is unclear, for
example, where a student fraudulently presents false information either verbally or in writing to the
University in order to gain an academic allowance or advantage. This may include falsified medical
documentation; an untrue explanation of circumstances affecting study; and false reasons for
absence (e.g., on a self-certificate). Such cases may be dealt with under this policy or the nonacademic misconduct policy. This is at the discretion of the Dean of Learning & Teaching or Provost
respectively1 as described in the Processes section of this document. In cases where there is
concern that the submission of falsified documentation may constitute a criminal offence, the matter
may be referred to the Police for consideration in addition to any University proceedings.
2.2. Academic misconduct
The examples of academic misconduct described here are not intended to be exhaustive. Students
who are in any doubt about whether their conduct might constitute academic misconduct should
either a) not engage in that activity or b) consult a member of the teaching staff such as their tutor,
the module coordinator or the School’s Academic Misconduct Officer (AMO) before engaging in the
activity.
Plagiarism is the act of taking ideas or work from other sources and representing them as if it is the
student’s own ideas or work. This may involve the use or appropriation of:
• Published or unpublished work done partly or wholly by another person,
• Work produced by, or obtained from, services such as essay mills, web sites, friends, family
members, with or without monetary transactions,
• Materials from lectures and tutorials without citation,
• Output, in whole or in part, of Artificial Intelligence (AI), including LLMs, where this is not
permitted. Permission to make use of AI within assessments varies depending on the module
and assessment, and will be set and communicated to students in accordance with the Policy
on Generative AI in Learning, Teaching and Assessment, or
• Language correction services or software.
The above list is not exhaustive and gives examples of ways of engaging in Plagiarism.
Multiple submission is the act of submitting for assessment a piece of work already (or
simultaneously) submitted for assessment in the same module, another module or in another
context. Multiple submission includes the submission of work that has substantial overlap with parts
of work submitted elsewhere; this includes experimental results, substantive parts of essays or
reports etc.

1

Henceforth referred to as the Dean or Provost respectively. Responsibilities assigned to the Dean or Provost in this
policy may be delegated in practice to the appropriate Associate Dean (Students) or Associate Provost respectively.

Falsification is the fabrication, alteration, or false representation of anything that forms part of a
student’s output; this may include, inter alia, data, materials, quotations, or citation.
In the context of data pertaining to experiments, this may include:
• Changing or deliberately omitting data in order to confirm or support a hypothesis not
supported by the actual data,
• Inventing or fabricating of the results of an experiment, which are then reported as genuine
measurements or findings.
Falsification can also take place outwith an experimental context. This may include instances where
information or sources are inaccurate, false, or fabricated, or where the citation does not contain
the information it purports to cite, or where a quotation is partly or wholly made up.
Falsification as a misconduct type is agnostic about motivation and means: it can occur due to, inter
alia a deliberate attempt to obfuscate, or inadvertent inclusion because of incorporation of outputs
of Generative AI tools powered by Large Language Models.
Academic misconduct in examinations or class tests includes the following prohibited activities:
• Taking electronic devices, software or materials into an examination venue (other than those
specifically permitted), irrespective of whether or not any use of the item(s) was made.
• Taking information (including notes in any format, books, electronically stored data or
illegitimately annotated copies of dictionaries, set texts, annotations made on or concealed on
parts of a student’s body, etc.) into an examination venue (including toilets etc.), except where
such items are left in an area designated by an invigilator, irrespective of whether or not any
use was made of the item(s).
• Providing University staff with incorrect or misleading information related to the examination
(prior to, at or after an examination).
• Unauthorised removal of an examination script, papers or blank examination stationery from
the examination hall.
• Unauthorised exit from the examination hall during the period of an examination.
• Unauthorised acquisition of examination questions prior to an examination, whether or not the
student is a candidate for that examination.
• Failure to follow the rules for an examination, in a way that might result in the gaining of an
academic advantage.
Aiding and abetting is any form of assistance with another person’s academic misconduct. This may
involve, for example, collusion with another person (whether or not a student) during an examination;
assisting any student in academic misconduct relating to an examination or class test; writing an
essay for a student; providing one’s own work that could be submitted for marking (either an entire
piece of work or a part); having a third party take the place of a student, for example in an
examination.
Coercion is where a student puts pressure on another student or member of staff to act in a particular
way, or attempts to do so, with the intention of gaining an academic advantage.
2.3. Language Correction Software and Services
2.3.1.

Routine Editorial Correction

The use of tools – be they AI-powered or not – that correct spelling, punctuation, typographical
errors and minor grammatical mistakes is permitted and falls outside the scope of Good
Academic Practice Policy. Such functionality is ubiquitous and embedded in standard wordprocessing software and is therefore regarded as routine editorial support rather than a
contribution to a student’s authorship. The University does not seek to regulate how students
engage in basic editorial corrections.

Exception: Where an assessment explicitly (i.e. stated in the Intended Learning Outcomes of the
module) evaluates communication or language proficiency, use of tools that reformulate or
enhance language may undermine the validity of the assessment and can be treated as
unauthorised assistance. In these instances, Schools may opt to prohibit the use of any language
correction outright, and the assessment instructions to students must be clear on this point;
Schools with modules that fall under this exception should develop ways of consistently informing
the students that this exception applies. Note, however, that this exception does not override a
disabled student’s legally protected right to use assistive technology as part of their support plan,
as per below (see below).
2.3.2.

Substantive Alteration and Generation

The use of software or services (including, but not limited to, tools and services marketed
specifically as ‘language correction tools’ or ‘grammar checkers’) to generate, develop or
materially alter academic content is not permitted unless explicitly authorised in the assessment
brief. Prohibited uses include, but are not limited to, the use of tools to:
• Paraphrase or summarise sources,
• Substantively rewrite passages,
• Transform a student’s input into academically structured sentences, paragraphs, or passages,
• Translate text drafted in another language before being submitted as the student’s own work in
the assessment’s language. Note that the assessment’s language at the University is English
unless otherwise stated.
Where such tools contribute and/or alter a student’s written work beyond routine editorial
correction, the resulting output will likely no longer represent the student’s own intellectual work.
Submission of such material as one’s own may constitute plagiarism and/or falsification under
the Good Academic Practice Policy.
For the avoidance of doubt, the classification of a tool by an education technology company that
markets it as ‘language correction’ or ‘grammar checker’ does not determine its permissibility.
The relevant distinction that determines permissibility is one about whether a student:
• checks their output for editorial corrections (which is permitted), or
• generates or materially alters what is expressed with such software or services (which is not
permitted unless explicitly authorised).
Whether a specific use of language correction software or services falls within the permissible
use is a matter of academic judgment to be determined in accordance with processes within
GAP, and students are advised to be mindful of this fact in their permitted use of these tools or
services.
2.3.3.

Declaration

All UG and PGT students will include a declaration at the beginning of the assessment. The
declaration should contain whether and how any language correction software or services has
been used.
2.3.4.

Reasonable Adjustments

The policy here concerning language correction is not intended to impede the use of assistive
technologies approved as part of a formal reasonable adjustment. However, students using
approved assistive technologies as part of a formalised reasonable adjustment remain
responsible for ensuring that submitted work represents their own intellectual output and
complies with the Good Academic Practice Policy. Note that students with a registered disability
specifically allowing assistive technology, are not required to declare the use of assistive
technology.

2.3.5.

Guidance for colleagues responsible for investigating academic misconduct

If colleagues responsible for investigating academic misconduct suspect the impermissible use
of language correction software or services during their investigation, they must check the
student’s disability tab before issuing any summons or outcome letters to the students, so that
any reasonable adjustments can be taken into account in the course of the investigation and
adjudication. In case of uncertainty, colleagues should consult with the Decanal team and/or the
Disability Team in Student Services.

3. PROCESSES
3.1. Work under the scope of the Good Academic Practice Policy
Markers of work may raise the issue of poor academic practice with a student when this does not
constitute academic misconduct. If a marker brings poor academic practice to the attention of a
student, they should specify which aspects of the work are not good practice. Such informal
discussions are not part of the process for dealing with allegations of academic misconduct and
cannot form part of any such allegation. Poor academic practice is, however, likely to lead to a lower
mark for a piece of work, whether or not that poor practice is the subject of an allegation of academic
misconduct.
Work that is submitted for formative assessment as part of the educational process rather than as
a required component of a module or degree programme, such as feedback on drafts, will not be
penalised under the University's policy on Good Academic Practice even if it constitutes poor
academic conduct. For example, a draft chapter required for progress review at PGR level, or a
pass/fail report will be regarded as formal and may come under the Good Academic Practice policy,
whereas an outline essay plan or rough chapter draft submitted for informal feedback will not. Where
any doubt as to the status of such work is possible, tutors should make it clear at the start of the
exercise.
3.2. Undergraduate (UG) and Taught Postgraduate (PGT) students – raising concerns
If anyone suspects academic misconduct in a piece of work, that person should inform the School’s
Academic Misconduct Officer (AMO) 2. At the point academic misconduct is suspected in a piece of
work, assessment of that work should cease until investigation is complete3. It is acceptable to tell
the student at this stage that their work is under investigation. Cases of suspected misconduct can
be considered after a grade has been formally reported and communicated to the student. If no case
of academic misconduct is found, the AMO also has the discretion to order a re-assessment of the
piece of work if they are concerned that original marking was inadvertently biased by the original
suspicion of misconduct. In most cases this re-mark will be completed by the second
marker/moderator. For interdisciplinary modules the School that provides the module coordinator
will also provide the AMO. The AMO will determine:
1)
2

if there is a case to answer;

Schools may, with the knowledge of the Dean and Provost, delegate this responsibility to
Departmental level Academic Misconduct Officers.
3 Where academic misconduct proceedings are still ongoing for a particular student at the time
of module results reporting, a temporary 0Z result should be reported.

2)

if so, whether the case can be dealt with by a written warning issued by the AMO, or;

3)

if not, whether it should be referred to a School or University Board of Adjudication to
determine whether misconduct has occurred.

If the AMO herself/himself raises the allegation, the Director of Teaching or Head of School will fulfil
the responsibilities of the AMO. The AMO or acting AMO must not have had prior involvement in
any aspect of the process such as marking, invigilation, supervision, etc.
In judging whether or not there is a case to answer, the AMO may scrutinise all work for a module
in which the allegation of misconduct has been raised, even if that work has already been marked
and returned to the student.
If the AMO finds there is no case to answer, no further action is taken, and the allegation can form
no part of any future investigation into academic misconduct.
If misconduct is suspected after a qualification is awarded, then the relevant AMO will be appointed
by the Dean or Provost and will follow the procedures as outlined in section 3.6. of this document.
3.3. Postgraduate Research (PGR) students – raising concerns
Research work that has been submitted for examination or for purposes of progression (progress
review, upgrade) may be the subject of an allegation of academic misconduct. Work submitted by
research students for other purposes (e.g. draft chapters) cannot be dealt with under the formal
procedures described in this document. Students should note that work submitted in the usual
course of supervision might not be subject to the same rigorous checks for academic misconduct
as work submitted for formal purposes.
In the case of work that has been submitted by a PGR student as part of a taught module, the
process regarding any suspected misconduct will follow the provisions of section 3.2.
In the case of work that has been submitted for compulsory assessment prior to final submission
and examination of the thesis (e.g. progress review), at the point academic misconduct is suspected,
assessment of that work should cease until investigation is complete. If no case of academic
misconduct is found, the AMO also has the discretion to order a re-assessment of the piece of work
if they are concerned that original process of assessment was inadvertently biased by suspicion of
misconduct. Where academic misconduct is suspected by an Examining Committee in the process
of examining a thesis, the examination must be suspended, and the AMO will investigate and decide
if there is a case to answer. If the AMO herself/himself raises the allegation, or is involved with the
case, then the Director of Postgraduate Research within the School will fulfil the responsibilities of
the AMO. Following concerns raised by the examining committee, if it is decided there is no case
of misconduct to hear, the Associate Provost (Students) has the discretion to decide whether a
new examining committee should be formed if they are concerned that the s tudent may be
subject to inadvertent bias by the original suspicion of misconduct.
If a research student is suspected of academic misconduct in work relating to progression (upgrade
or progress review), the person raising the allegation should alert the AMO, and the following
procedure will be taken by the AMO:
The AMO will determine:
1)

if there is a case to answer;

2)

if so, whether the case can be dealt with by a written warning issued by the AMO, or;

3)

if not, whether it should be referred to a School or University Board of Adjudication to
determine whether misconduct has occurred.

If the AMO herself/himself raises the allegation, the Director of Postgraduate Studies (Research) or
Head of School will fulfil the responsibilities of the AMO. The AMO or acting AMO must not have
had prior involvement in any aspect of the process such as marking, invigilation, supervision, etc.

If the AMO finds there is no case to answer, no further action is taken, and the allegation can form
no part of any future investigation into academic misconduct.
If academic misconduct has been upheld in the case of a research student prior to final submission
of the thesis, but the student has been permitted to submit a thesis, then the External Examiner(s)
for the thesis should not be informed of the earlier instance/s of misconduct. External Examiners
should approach the examination as impartial judges of the quality of the work that has been
submitted.
If the AMO judges that there is a case to answer, but the misconduct is considered very minor, then
a written warning may be deemed appropriate (see 4. Sanctions, under PGR Sanctions). If, however
there is a case to answer and the suspected misconduct is deemed to be significant enough to
proceed with further investigation, then the Provost must be consulted. At this point the Provost will,
in consultation with the Vice-Principal Education (Proctor) as necessary, either confirm that the case
is to be pursued under the Good Academic Practice policy, or alternatively that it should be pursued
as a case of non-academic misconduct. All such PGR cases of suspected academic misconduct with
a case to answer (including work submitted for progression) should be reported to the Research
Integrity Team. In such a case, the Provost or their delegate will liaise with the Vice-Principal
(Research, Collections & Innovation) or their delegate to determine how the two processes will be
applied. Such decisions are made on a case-by-case basis and will be clearly communicated to the
student. For example, it is possible that one process will have to be paused to allow the other process
to conclude. If the process in the Good Academic Practice Policy is thereby delayed, the Provost or
their delegate will inform the student of any developments regarding the timeline. If the case is
pursued under the Good Academic Practice Policy it must be considered by a University Board of
Adjudication. In cases where examiners’ reports make reference to the alleged misconduct, these
will be supplied to the Board.
If misconduct is suspected prior to the viva taking place then the viva is to be put on hold whilst the
AMO investigates and decides if there is a case to answer. If academic misconduct is suspected
during the viva, or shortly before the viva, the viva should still take place but the examiners should
not report a decision until after the suspected misconduct has been investigated and the case
concluded.
If misconduct is suspected after the award of the degree, then an investigating officer will be
appointed by the Provost and will follow the procedures as outlined in section 3.6. of this document.
3.4. Escalation of cases of alleged misconduct
When a case of alleged misconduct is raised, the AMO will check with the Proctor’s Office as to
whether the student under investigation has a previous history of misconduct, and if so, the extent
of this previous history. (This includes previous study at the University such as an earlier degree
or micro-credential). The AMO will then refer the case to be heard at the appropriate level. The
AMO can also review Good Academic Practice Case Studies for further guidance on which cases
should be heard at the appropriate Board.
Please also note that post-award, group misconduct, and suspected misconduct during an
examination have additional guidance in Sections 3.6-3.8.
1. Previous History of Academic Misconduct – Key Considerations
As outlined in Section 2.2. of this policy, academic misconduct is varied in form and whilst a student
may have a history of previous academic misconduct of a particular type (e.g. plagiarism), a further
allegation of academic misconduct of another type (e.g. multiple submission) may arise. There are
two views that can be taken on this under the auspices of this policy, and are subject to academic
judgement:
• The first is that the student should have the new suspected misconduct of a differing type treated
as a potential first offence. This may mean that whilst a student holds a written warning for a
previous offence, or had that case heard at a School Board, as the case is a new form of
suspected misconduct it should be addressed by issuing a new written warning or heard at the

School Board level. This would be the most likely route of action if a student has one recorded
offence of academic misconduct of one particular form, and a subsequent allegation is raised of
academic misconduct of a completely different form. This does not circumvent the AMO’s right
to escalate the case to higher levels of adjudication if they believe the instance of suspected
misconduct to be serious enough.
• The second is that the student in question may have a substantial history of previous academic
misconduct (e.g. two proven cases of differing misconduct treated as a first offence, or two cases
of misconduct of the same type). For example, a student may have committed two instances of
academic misconduct, and consequently received two opportunities to undertake the remedial
training on good academic practice. Repeated suspected offences of any form of academic
misconduct may therefore be viewed as a flagrant disregard for the standards of good academic
practice, and it would be appropriate to refer any new allegations to be heard as a repeat
offence.
• Whilst the AMO has the right to exercise their academic judgement when determining the level
at which the case of suspected new misconduct should be heard, students who have been found
to have committed academic misconduct on two or more occasions must be referred to a
University Board.
The process from the raising of an allegation to a written warning or referral to a board must
be completed within five working days unless there is a compelling reason why this is not
possible.
2. Written Warnings
• If the student has no prior history of misconduct, a written warning may be appropriate. If there
is a case to answer, and the AMO regards the nature of the misconduct to be such that a written
warning is the appropriate sanction, the AMO may issue the written warning via MMS.
• Suspected first offences can be heard at either a School Board, or University Board level if the
AMO believes the suspected misconduct is potentially egregious enough to warrant this. The
AMO has the freedom to exercise their academic judgement as to the severity of the suspected
misconduct, and the level at which a case should be heard.
•
A written warning can only be issued once for a particular type of misconduct (e.g.
plagiarism).
The rationale for this is that whilst a student may have a previous history of misconduct under
one form of misconduct (e.g. plagiarism), if they are found to have committed academic
misconduct in another area (e.g., multiple submission), it may be appropriate to issue a written
warning for this new offence. If, however the student is suspected of committing that type of
misconduct again, then the matter must be referred to either a School or University Board.
• Equally, the AMO can take the view that a student with a history of repeated misconduct should
have their case heard at a School or University Board, and that a written warning for committing
a new form of suspected misconduct is not appropriate.
• If there is a case to answer, and the AMO regards the nature of the misconduct to be such that
a written warning is the appropriate sanction, the AMO should issue the written warning via
MMS. The student’s name will be held on the Academic Misconduct Register. The student must
retake the online Training in Good Academic Practice course within five working days of the
date of the written warning. Support on good academic practice is available from IELLI. If a
written warning is issued, then no further action is taken beyond this point.
3. Boards of Adjudication
• If there is a case to answer, and the AMO does not consider that a written warning is the
appropriate sanction, the AMO will refer the case either to a School or University Board to be
heard.

• The AMO may use the Guidance for Staff section of this policy, and the range of sanctions
available to the different Boards, to determine to which Board the case should be referred.
Further to this, as outlined under 1. Previous History of Academic Misconduct – Key
Considerations, the AMO has the right to consider the extent to which previous history of
misconduct will determine the level of Board at which the case will be heard.
• Further guidelines around which Board to refer a case to when a student has a previous history
of academic misconduct of a particular type as outlined below:
a) School Board: If a student has a record of a previous first case of academic misconduct
of a particular type (e.g. plagiarism) that was sanctioned with the use of a written warning,
then the AMO is required to escalate the new allegation of the same type to a Board of
Adjudication to be heard. In most cases this will be a School Board of Adjudication, but in
cases where the suspected academic misconduct is egregious, the AMO can take the
decision to escalate this to a University Board.
b) University Board: If the student has had a previous case of academic misconduct of any
type upheld at either a School or University Board level, then the new allegation must be
heard at a University Board.
3.5. Boards of Adjudication – constitution, organisation, and outcomes
1. School Board of Adjudication – Constitution and Organisation
The Board will be appointed by the Head of School, Director of Teaching, or Director of Postgraduate
Studies (Taught). It will consist of a convener and at least one further member of academic staff.
The convener must have previously participated in a School Board, and they must have attended a
training session organised by the Proctor’s Office. The student will be informed of the membership of
the Board in the formal invitation to attend the Board, and in exceptional circumstances the student
has the right to make a well justified and reasonable request for modified membership of the Board,
within two working days of the invitation to attend the Board.
• The convener will arrange a hearing of the Board and will be responsible for all the arrangements
relating to the consideration and conduct of the investigation, up to and including presenting a
report of the outcome.
• These duties will involve setting a place and time for the hearing; formally inviting the student
to attend using the template letters provided by the Proctor’s Office; informing the student of his/her
right to be accompanied; arranging for a member of professional services staff to act as clerk at
the meeting; presiding at the meeting of the Board; communicating with the School(s) and the
Dean or Provost; writing a final report of the result; and informing the student of the outcome and
sanction, as well as providing details to the student of the right to appeal.
• If, during the course of the hearing, the School Board of Adjudication discovers evidence
of additional misconduct over and above that drawn to the attention of the AMO, or the original
misconduct is found to be more serious than first thought, the School Board of Adjudication can
at this point recommend that a hearing proceed to a University Board of Adjudication. In this
event, the convener should contact the Dean or Provost within three working days, and the
Dean or Provost will convene a University Board.
• If a student with a pending misconduct case has a separate incident of misconduct reported
before the outcome of an ongoing case is known, the subsequent case will be put on hold until
the outcome of the previous case is known. The outcome of the ongoing case will not be taken
into consideration when dealing with the subsequent case. The timeframes for the subsequent
case will commence on the day of the communication of the outcome of the previous case to
the student.

2. University Board of Adjudication – Constitution and Organisation
The Board will consist of three or more members nominated by the Dean or Provost or their delegate
from experienced staff across the University. Each Board will include at least one male and at least
one female staff member, and members drawn from two or more Faculties. The School responsible
for the module in which the academic misconduct was allegedly perpetrated will not be represented
on the Board. The University Board is selected and approved by the Proctor’s Office. The student
will be informed of the membership of the Board in the formal invitation to attend the Board, and in
exceptional circumstances the student has the right to make a well justified and reasonable request
for modified membership of the Board, within two working days of the invitation to attend the Board.
• One member will be appointed by the Dean or Provost or their delegate to serve as convener
and will be responsible for arrangements relating to the consideration and conduct of the
investigation, up to and including presenting a report of the outcome.
• These duties will involve: setting a date and time for the hearing; formally inviting the student
to attend using the available template letter; arranging for a member of professional services
staff to act as clerk at the meeting; presiding at the meeting of the Board; communicating with
the School(s) and the Dean or Provost; writing a final report of the result; and informing the
student of the outcome and sanction using the available template letter.
• The Proctor’s Office will arrange the venue for the Hearing, provide template letters to the
convener and provide contact details of the reporting AMO. The convener will contact the
reporting AMO who will provide the convener with the following documentation which should be
circulated to the other board members:
a) identities of the student(s) involved;
b) information about previous upheld cases of misconduct recorded on the academic
misconduct register – nature of allegations, level that the case was heard at, and
sanctions applied;
c) copy of the plagiarism detection software report (if applicable) and any supporting
evidence provided by the AMO (this should also be sent to the student(s)).
• The Proctor’s Office will also contact the AMO to confirm that the AMO will present the case
on behalf of the School. If the AMO is unable to attend, they should arrange a deputy.
3. Convening and Conducting a Board of Adjudication (applicable to both School and University
Boards)
The following outlines the normal procedure for the hearing. The convener, however, has discretion
reasonably to vary these arrangements to suit the needs of individual cases, and in exceptional
circumstances only, to direct that the hearing might be conducted remotely4.
• Boards must meet to consider the case within fifteen working days of the convener being
appointed, unless there is a compelling reason why this is not possible.
• The student(s) concerned must be invited using the appropriate letter templates by email
to attend the hearing with at least five working days’ notice. Students have the right to defer the
date of a board until after the examination period if the board is scheduled to occur in the week
prior to, or during, the examination period. Summons letters should only be issued when there
are five working days of semester between the summons and the date of the Board of
Adjudication (exceptions may be made for graduation and progression purposes). If a University
closure, vacation or examination period begins within the five-day period of notification, the
convener of the Board will endeavour to convene the Board before the closure, vacation or
examination period, unless the student requests that the Board be deferred (e.g., after the
respective vacation or examination period).

4

Policy amended to reflect the exceptional circumstances created by the Covid-19 pandemic.

• The student must also be informed in the summons that the meeting concerns suspected
academic misconduct, the type of misconduct suspected, and the piece(s) of work in which it is
suspected. The student must also receive all the evidence being considered by the Board when
the summons letter is sent by email.
• A student attending a Board of Adjudication has the right to be accompanied and represented
by another member of the University. This representative must be a person who is either
presently matriculated as a student; or is an employee of the University Court of the University
of St Andrews; or who is elected as a sabbatical officer of or an employee of the Students’
Association of the University of St Andrews. The representative cannot have been previously
involved in the case, for example, a) raising the allegation of academic misconduct, b) teaching
in the module concerned, c) marking the piece of work. Individuals external to the University
cannot attend.
• If a student fails to attend without good cause, the Board of Adjudication may choose to proceed
in the student’s absence. Students who are unable to or choose not to attend may send a written
statement. They may also be represented in their absence by a representative as defined above.
•

No audio or electronic recording of a Board of Adjudication will be permitted.
• The AMO will normally present the case to the Board. The Board of Adjudication may also ask
others concerned to give evidence and may seek advice from others within and outwith the
University. The student has the right to challenge any evidence presented and to present their
own evidence.
• The AMO, student(s) and any others who are not members of the Board of Adjudication will
leave at this point while it considers the evidence and seeks to establish whether or not
misconduct has taken place.

4. Board Deliberation, Verdict, and Sanction Recommendations (applicable to both School and
University Boards)
• An allegation of academic misconduct may only be upheld if a strict majority of the board
members support this decision.
• If the Board finds there is insufficient evidence of academic misconduct, the case is dismissed
and the Dean or Provost informed. The student should also be informed using the appropriate
letter templates in writing by email within five working days of the hearing.
• In line with High Principle No. 9, in determining whether an accusation of academic misconduct
is upheld, absence of intention to commit misconduct, extenuating circumstances, or ignorance
of the rules is not a valid defence. Boards cannot therefore take extenuating circumstances into
account when determining whether or not the student has committed misconduct, no matter how
compelling. Students are however invited to present any extenuating circumstances to the Board
which may be taken into account if an accusation of misconduct is upheld, which in turn may be
used to determine the nature of the sanction to be applied as outlined below. Students may not
request that mitigating circumstances be taken into account retrospectively after a Board has
taken place.
• If the accusation of academic misconduct is upheld, extenuating circumstances may be taken
into consideration when determining the sanction. This may mean that a Board, in deciding on
a sanction, may consider the extenuating circumstances presented justifiably compelling, and
therefore give a reduced sanction in light of these circumstances. Please see 4.3 of this policy
for further information.

• If the Board of Adjudication upholds an allegation of misconduct, it must recommend a sanction
to the Dean or Provost (see Section 4) and provide minutes of the hearing, using the pro forma
provided. The student must not be informed of the sanction, nor should the sanction be
discussed with the student, until it has been approved by the Dean or Provost. The Dean or
Provost will ordinarily accept the Board’s recommendation but may propose an alternative
sanction.
• Once the Board of Adjudication has met it has five working days in which to consult the Dean
or Provost about any sanction to be imposed; for the sanction to be agreed; for any other
recommendation to be agreed, and for an email to be received by the student. When an email
informs a student that the case against her/him has been upheld, the same email will give details
of the appropriate appeals process.
5. Communicating the Verdict and Outcome of the Board (applicable to both School and
University Boards)
• Once the Dean has approved a sanction, the student must receive emailed notification from the
convener informing them of the outcome of the Board of Adjudication and its rationale, within
five working days of the hearing.
• The notification will also inform the student of the requirement to retake the Moodle course called
Training in Good Academic Practice. This will be monitored by the Proctor’s Office, and students
must successfully complete this training within five working days of the date of the email
informing the student of the outcome of the Board of Adjudication, which will then be noted on
the Academic Misconduct Register. Failure to retake the Training in Good Academic Practice
course may be taken into account should the student be investigated again for suspected
academic misconduct. Students will also be offered support on good academic practice from
IELLI, and where required support from Student Services. The notification of the outcome of the
Board of Adjudication should be copied to the Director of Teaching relevant to the module
involved, Adviser of Studies, Academic Misconduct Officer, Student Services, Module Results,
Proctor’s Office, and the Senate Office.
• After any case has been upheld, the student’s name or students’ names will be placed on
the Academic Misconduct Register.
• Where the outcome of a Board of Adjudication affects a student’s module grade, it is the
School’s responsibility to ensure that appropriate action is taken promptly, and the result
correctly reported to the Dean or Provost (who will report to Registry as appropriate).
•Communication to Students. The University will be mindful of when communications are sent
to students, especially when the content is unfavourable, potentially distressing, and/ or
sensitive. To ensure students can access the support they need, the University will try to avoid
sending such messages on Fridays or late in the day, when immediate help may not be available.
If sending a message at these times is unavoidable, information about when and how students
can access appropriate support must be included.
3.6. Procedure where academic misconduct is suspected post-award
Where academic misconduct is suspected after the award of the degree, the matter should be
reported to the Dean or Provost. The Dean or Provost will then instruct either the AMO (for
undergraduate and taught postgraduate awards) or an appointed investigating officer (for
postgraduate research awards) who will consider the evidence and report to the Dean or Provost
their findings, who may dismiss allegations as trivial or vexatious. If the Dean or Provost considers
that there is a case to answer then they will appoint a University Board of Adjudication and
procedures used will follow the appropriate conventions as outlined throughout section 3 of this
document according to the level of award (e.g. UG & PGT, or PGR).

The graduate under investigation is to be afforded the same rights and accommodations as any
currently matriculated student who is suspected of academic misconduct at the University as
outlined in this document:
• This includes the right to be accompanied and represented by another member of the University
at the Board. This representative must be a person who is either presently matriculated as a
student; or is an employee of the University Court of the University of St Andrews; or who is
elected as a sabbatical officer of or an employee of the Students’ Association of the University
of St Andrews. The representative must not have previous involvement in the case, for example,
a) raising the allegation of academic misconduct; b) teaching in the module concerned; c)
marking the piece of work. Individuals external to the University cannot attend.
• If the graduate under investigation fails to attend without good cause, the Board of Adjudication
may choose to proceed in the graduate’s absence. If the graduate under investigation is unable
to or chooses not to attend, then they may send a written statement. They may also be
represented in their absence by a representative as defined above. No audio or electronic
recording of a Board of Adjudication will be permitted.
Procedures for investigation post-award may function outwith the usual timescales outlined in this
document as a result of the complexity of the investigation. Examples include but are not restricted
to:
• The graduate under investigation is no longer resident in or local to St Andrews and must
be provided with reasonable time to attend a scheduled Board in person;
• Significant time may have elapsed since the suspected misconduct and the raising of an
allegation, and therefore a more complex investigation may need to take place;
• The evidence to be assessed by both the Board and the graduate under investigation may
be of sufficient volume and complexity that greater time is to be afforded outwith the normal
timescales for consideration.
• In such cases, the convener of the Board must make an assessment on the additional time
required outwith the usual timescales for the organisation and conduct of a University Board of
Adjudication and write to the Dean or Provost seeking their approval prior to contacting the
graduate under investigation. It must be emphasised that any alteration to timescales is at the
discretion of the Dean or Provost.
• If permission has been granted by the Dean or Provost, the convener will then write a
summons letter to the graduate under investigation, outlining the reasons for the investigation,
why the investigation will operate outside the usual timescales for a University Board of
Adjudication, and an offering of at least three dates and times for the graduate to attend the
Board.
All evidence under consideration by the Board must also be sent with the summons letter for the
graduate under investigation to consider ahead of the Board. The graduate under investigation may
appeal to the convener for an alternative date and time for the Board to meet, but this must be within
20 working days of the date of the summons letter, be for sufficient reasons (e.g. unavoidable work
commitments or extenuating personal circumstances), and must be approved by the Dean
or Provost.
In situations where the graduate under investigation cannot be contacted (e.g., the University does
not hold up to date contact details and cannot obtain these through reasonable means) or the
graduate does not respond to the convener’s request for contact, then the issue will be referred to
the Dean or Provost for further consideration. The University will undertake reasonable endeavours
to make the graduate under investigation aware of the case raised against them, but ultimately in
the absence of any contact with the graduate, the Dean or Provost can stipulate that the Board can
proceed in the graduate’s absence.
Once the Board has concluded its considerations, they will reach a decision subject to approval by
the Proctor who acts as an independent third party and ensures that the appropriate actions are
taken. This can include dismissal of the allegations, application of a sanction from the sanctions

frameworks outlined in section 4 of this document, or if the misconduct is considered egregious,
alteration or withdrawal of the degree award.
Where an allegation is raised regarding work submitted for a micro-credential after completion of the
individual micro-credential, the procedures for investigating misconduct post-award shall be applied
at the discretion of the Dean of Learning and Teaching or the Provost. Where a student has been
awarded a degree or other award or qualification through credit accumulation from micro-credentials,
the usual procedures for investigation post-award will always apply.

3.7. Special procedures to be adopted when dealing with group academic misconduct
The University will endeavour to deal with any cases of alleged group academic misconduct in the
same way as it would deal with any other incident of academic misconduct. However, there may be
occasions when it is necessary to adopt a special procedure, for example, when large numbers of
students are involved in a particular case.
These special procedures will be employed at the discretion of the Dean or Provost and will involve
any or all of the following: extension of the timescales at any stage of the process; group interviews,
followed by the option of interviewing individual students (if either the Board or student requests it, and
subject to the Dean’s or Provost’s approval); submission of written statements by the students
(instead of personal hearings); presentation of the evidence to the group collectively; time-limited
hearings, with the opportunity for a follow-up interview (as above). In very exceptional circumstances,
especially where long delays in the process might otherwise occur, the Dean or Provost may authorise
the use of more than one University Board to hear the cases. In this event, minutes will be taken at
each Board hearing and the Boards will meet to agree outcomes once all of the interviews have
been held.
In cases where a subset of students is identified to be entirely responsible for the misconduct (for
example by admission of responsibility) then the process continues only for, and sanctions are
applied only to, the responsible subset of the group.
In all academic misconduct cases involving more than two students, the convener will be guided by
the Dean or Provost who will advise on the conduct of the hearing and ensure that proceedings are
undertaken in a fair and orderly manner.
3.8. Procedural steps to be undertaken by the Invigilator in cases where the academic
misconduct is suspected during an examination or class test
In a class test, the member of staff invigilating should report any suspected case of academic
misconduct to the AMO within the School.
In an exam, if an Invigilator has reason to suspect one or more students of academic misconduct
they should call on a second Invigilator (if available) to observe the student(s) before intervening.
Where the apparent misconduct is so blatant as to be potentially disruptive to other students (e.g. the
open use of notes or other items), the Chief Invigilator should intervene immediately to remove the
prohibited items. In cases where intervening would be potentially more disruptive, the Chief
Invigilator should wait until the end of the examination before taking action. Regardless of when the
first action is taken, at the end of the examination the Chief Invigilator, together with at least one
observer, should:
• speak to the student(s) concerned informing him/her of their suspicions and that he/she will
be reported to the AMO for suspected academic misconduct;
• remove and retain any prohibited items, if possible, issuing a receipt if necessary (e.g.
if equipment is involved), and in the case of a refusal by the student(s) to hand over such items,
formally record the refusal and any grounds given;
• in cases where it is believed that relevant materials are written upon or concealed upon parts
of a student’s body, undertake the following procedure:
o

immediately notify the University Examinations Officer;

o take the student to a private place to meet with two members of the University
academic staff of the same gender as the student;
o the two members of academic staff should be as specific as possible about what they
wish to see, and a refusal by the student should be recorded along with a statement of the
grounds for refusal;
• note the names and matriculation number of any student involved, the module, time and location
of the incident. A brief summary of the incident will be submitted to the University Examinations
Officer through an Examination Irregularity Report.

Where time permits, the Chief Invigilator should seek advice on the action to be taken by contacting
the University Examinations Officer. Within 24 hours of the examination the Chief Invigilator must
submit a full report, signed and dated, to the University Examinations Officer to be forwarded to the
AMO and copied to the Dean or Provost.
The report should outline the circumstances of the incident and must:
a) where possible, identify all students involved and the degree of alleged involvement of each;
b) describe and, if possible, provide all the evidence on which the suspicion is based;
c) contain details of the use of any materials brought into the examination (whether inadvertently
or deliberately) in contravention of the Good Academic Practice policy or Examination Rules
for Candidates;
d) provide written statements from the other staff observers of the incident and the names of
any students or others who may corroborate the suspicions.
If the suspected misconduct involves a student’s exam script, the anonymised script(s) will be sent
to the School in the standard way to be internally marked as normal, with no information about the
possible academic misconduct - marking should proceed at this point without bias or prejudice. Once
a mark has been given, the marker will then be asked to review the mark based on the report
submitted by the Chief Invigilator. The marker will report to the AMO on the extent to which any
unauthorised material was relevant to the examination and whether it appears to have been used
by the student(s).
In cases where a suspicion of academic misconduct arises in the first instance from a marker, rather
than an Invigilator, the marker should report in writing without delay to the AMO the following: the
nature of the suspicion, the matriculation numbers of all students suspected of being involved, the
evidence upon which the suspicion is based, and any corroborating evidence. Once anonymity has
been broken after the examination process is complete, cases can be pursued or not, as
appropriate. The AMO will receive all such reports and proceed according to the University’s Good
Academic Practice policy.
NB. Academic misconduct relating to an examination will normally be considered by a School Board
of Adjudication.
4. SANCTIONS
Possible sanctions are outlined below. These are applicable both prior to, and after, the award of a
qualification.

4.1. Sanctions for UG/PGT Students
Issuer

Available Sanctions
Marks/grades referred to are on the Common
Reporting Scale

Academic Misconduct Officer

Relating to piece of assessment
•

School Board of Adjudication

Written warning issued through MMS

Relating to piece of assessment
•

Written warning issued through MMS

•

Piece of assessment capped at 7

or
or
University Board of Adjudication

• Zero for piece of assessment
Relating to piece of assessment
•

Written warning issued through MMS

•

Piece of assessment capped at 7

•

Zero for piece of assessment

or
or
University Boards are able to
award a sanction to both a piece
Relating to module
of assessment and the related
module
• Module capped at 7
or
•

Zero for module with
a) the right to retake the module for credit only,
(this sanction allows a student to retake a
compulsory module), or
b) the right to take an additional module for
credit only, or
c) no right to take an additional module (this
sanction is applicable only to students in the
Honours part of an undergraduate degree
programme; its purpose is to prevent the
student from completing an Honours
degree)
NB. The issuing of this penalty does not imply any
variation of the normal limits on the duration of the
degree programme
Relating to a degree
•

In exceptional cases where sanctions related to
a module are not applicable, University Boards
of Adjudication may apply the above sanctions
to another module.

Relating to continuation of studies
•

Termination of Studies

The University of St Andrews is a charity registered in Scotland, No: SC013532

4.2. Sanctions for PGR Students
Issuers

Sanction

Sanctions available 1. Where minor concerns are
to
AMO
and
outlined about the student’s work
University
Board
that are not viewed as requiring
a hearing at the University Board
(Current students)
level, the AMO has the authority
to issue a written warning
outlining the concerns and what
remedial work the student must
complete to resolve these
concerns. A University Board
may also issue a written warning,
if they deem the misconduct to
be very minor and wish to
recommend remedial work to the
student.
Sanctions available 1. Where there are serious
to University Board
concerns outlined about the
(Current students)
student’s work at a compulsory
point of assessment (e.g.,
progress review), the AMO has
the authority to refer this to a
University Board, and if the case
is upheld, the Board can choose
one of the following, depending
on the nature and extent of the
misconduct:
•

•

•

Description
This sanction would be
used in very minor cases
during the course of a
student’s studies (e.g.,
issues
in
progression
review submissions).

This sanction would be
used in serious cases
during the course of a
student’s studies (e.g.,
issues
in
progression
review submissions).

Student to undertake
remedial work to resolve the
issues in the thesis, after
which they will be rereviewed in line with the
annual progress review
policy. A written warning will
also be issued.
Student re-registered to
complete a lower award. A
written warning will be
issued.
Student has their studies
terminated.

2. Thesis not accepted in its
present form. Candidate must
amend the parts affected by
misconduct and resubmit the
revised thesis within three
months. New version provided to
examiners for the examination
process. Student must retake
GAP and Research Integrity
modules before being allowed to
graduate.

This sanction would be
used in relatively minor
cases where the originality
of the thesis largely remains
(e.g., plagiarism in the
literature review) and only
after the thesis has been
submitted.

The University of St Andrews is a charity registered in Scotland, No: SC013532

3. Thesis not accepted in its
present form but the student
given the opportunity to revise
and resubmit the thesis within 6
months. Candidate must
resubmit the thesis and pay a
resubmission fee. Student must
retake GAP and Research
Integrity modules before being
allowed to graduate. Academic
misconduct noted on the student
record.

The academic misconduct
is such that the originality of
the thesis is called in to
question, but the examiners
and/or University Board feel
there is still enough original
contribution to warrant a
PhD upon revision and reexamination. Only available
after the thesis has been
submitted.

4. Thesis not accepted in its
present form but the student
given the opportunity to amend
the affected portion only for
resubmission for the degree of
MPhil only. Candidate must pay
a resubmission fee. Student
must retake GAP and Research
Integrity modules before being
allowed to graduate. Academic
misconduct noted on the student
record. Student has no right to
pursue additional degrees at St
Andrews.

To be applied in serious
cases
of
academic
misconduct where there is
not enough original content
to warrant a PhD. Only
available after the thesis
has been submitted.

5. Thesis rejected and no degree
awarded. Academic misconduct
noted on student record. Student
has no right to pursue additional
degrees at St Andrews.

Originality of the thesis has
been
significantly
and
detrimentally compromised
and undermined by the
misconduct,
and
no
remedial work will be able to
resolve
the
concerns
highlighted
during
the
investigation and University
Board.

Sanctions available 1. Written warning that degree may
to University Board
be withdrawn. Individual given
(former
research
three months to correctly
students)
reference or remove the affected
content. Corrections approved by
the original internal examiner (or
investigating officer where the
examiner is no longer a member
of staff at the University). Degree
not withdrawn if investigating

Reserved for cases of
serious
academic
misconduct where there is
not proof of enough original
content to warrant any
postgraduate
research
degree. Only available after
the thesis has been
submitted.
This sanction would be
used in relatively minor
cases which may likely be
the result of poor academic
practice, and where the
originality of the thesis
largely remains.

The University of St Andrews is a charity registered in Scotland, No: SC013532

officer is satisfied with the
amended thesis. Research
misconduct proceedings may be
triggered.
2. Written warning that degree may
be withdrawn. Individual given 12
months to correct the affected
content for review by the original
internal examiner (or
investigating officer where the
examiner is no longer a member
of staff at the University).
Research misconduct
proceedings may be triggered.
Award of degree may be upheld
or original degree may be
revoked and a lesser degree
awarded. Student record
updated to reflect academic
misconduct.

3. Withdrawal of degree

The academic misconduct
is such that the originality of
the thesis is called in to
question, but the examiners
and/or University Board feel
there may still be enough
original
contribution
to
warrant a postgraduate
research
award
upon
revision
and
reexamination.
Reserved for cases of
egregious
academic
misconduct
where
the
originality of the thesis has
been compromised.

Originality of the thesis has
been
significantly
and
detrimentally compromised
and undermined by the
misconduct,
and
no
remedial work will be able to
resolve
the
concerns
highlighted
during
the
investigation and University
Board.

4.3. Mitigation in sanction determination – extenuating circumstances
In line with High Principle No. 9, extenuating circumstances that the student considers to have
affected them at the time they committed academic misconduct may be presented to the Board for
the purpose of sanction mitigation. Students must provide evidence to support a claim of extenuating
circumstances (e.g., medical evidence or support from Student Services), and unsubstantiated
claims of extenuating circumstances will not be taken into account. If students under investigation
require further time to produce evidence to substantiate their claims of extenuating circumstances,
they can request time from the Board in order to do so. This is at the Board’s discretion, and the
student must explain to the Board the exact reasons why there is a delay and why they require more
time (e.g., they are awaiting an appointment to request this evidence from the doctor).
It must be emphasised that the presentation of extenuating circumstances does not guarantee
mitigation when determining a sanction, and such mitigation is the exception rather than the rule.
As stated in High Principle No. 9., in determining whether an accusation of academic misconduct is
upheld, absence of intention to commit misconduct, extenuating circumstances or ignorance of the
rules are not a valid defence. Whilst a student may present extenuating circumstances as a
mitigating factor to the Board determining the sanction, the Board may subsequently decide that
these extenuating circumstances are not sufficiently mitigating and proceed to impose the full
sanction for the respective misconduct.
The University of St Andrews is a charity registered in Scotland, No: SC013532

5. RECORDS OF ACADEMIC MISCONDUCT SANCTIONS
The Proctor’s Office will keep records of sanctions issued for academic misconduct. The main
reasons for record keeping are to allow identification of repeat offenders and to allow the
effectiveness of the University’s procedures to be monitored. Records help the University identify
long-term trends, for instance as part of academic monitoring. A record of past decisions helps
Board members and the Dean and Provost to determine appropriate sanctions and so to ensure
that similar offences attract similar sanctions from one School to another.
In addition, the University may provide information on academic misconduct to third parties, on
request, when providing references for students. The University may also need to disclose
information on academic misconduct where students are involved in joint/collaborative degree
programmes or on study abroad/exchange programmes. Students will be explicitly informed when
such information is disclosed. For UG/PGT students, the information provided will be sanctions that
have been applied at module level only. Module-level sanctions are also recorded on the academic
transcript. Information on sanctions above a written warning will be given and recorded for PGR
students.
The information recorded will be:
a) Student name;
b) Matriculation number;
c) UG, PGT, or PGR;
d) Nature of the academic misconduct;
e) First or repeat offence (and number of repeat offence);
f) Individual or group case;
g) Type of Board;
h) Date of hearing;
i) Sanction applied;
j) Dean’s or Provost’s approval;
k) Date sanction has been applied.
This information and minutes of meetings of School/University Boards of Adjudication will be
retained in accordance with relevant data protection legislation.
Access to the full record will be restricted to designated members of the Proctor’s Office. Details of
any previous case(s) of misconduct and sanctions applied will be made available to the AMO, Board
and student and circulated to the panel with the paperwork. This information is not considered when
deciding whether an allegation should be upheld, but may be considered in determining an
appropriate sanction.
The Dean and Provost will produce an annual monitoring report for the Academic Monitoring Group,
detailing the number of cases arising during the year, the Schools involved, a summary of
misconduct types and a summary of outcomes. All monitoring will be anonymised and will not
identify individual cases.
In cases of students on the Register who remain at or return to the institution to undertake a further
programme of study (or who remain at or return to the institution to undertake a further microcredential), their records of misconduct will remain on the central Register throughout that further
programme.

The University of St Andrews is a charity registered in Scotland, No: SC013532

6. ESCALATIONS AND APPEALS
6.1. Right to escalation to a higher Board
A student who receives a written warning from an AMO has the right to ask for their case to be
escalated to a School Board of Adjudication. Such a request should be made to the AMO within five
working days of the warning being issued.
A student does not need to provide any rationale or evidence for an escalation request.
The student should be aware that while the School Board may decide to revoke the written warning,
it may also uphold the original decision, or apply the full range of sanctions available to School
Boards.
7. APPEALS
7.1. Right to Appeal
Students have a right of appeal against any outcomes (which can refer to either any decision on
whether academic misconduct had taken place, or any sanctions that follow, or both) made by a
School or University Board of Adjudication, provided that the conditions outlined in section 7.2 are
met.
7.2 Grounds for appeal
7.2.1. The two grounds for appeal
Appeals can only be made on the following grounds, depending on the nature of the appeal:
a) Extenuating personal circumstances materially affecting academic performance, of
which the University was not aware when the GAP outcome was reached, and which
could not reasonably have been disclosed by the student (an explanation for earlier nondisclosure is always required); or
b) Defective or irregular procedure that has materially affected the GAP outcome being
reached by the relevant Board of Adjudication.
7.2.2. When grounds for appeal apply
There are two components to the outcome that a student can appeal within the context of Good
Academic Practice Policy:
1) The decision that academic misconduct has taken place. Note that an appeal against a
decision can only be made on the grounds of defective or irregular procedure that has
materially affected the decision of the relevant Board of Adjudication. The extenuating
circumstance ground is not available for an appeal against a decision.
2) The sanction that follows from the decision about academic misconduct having taken
place. Note that an appeal against a sanction may be made on either or both of the
grounds defined above.
Additionally, any appeal that falls under ‘Stage 2 – Senate Appeal’ as per the University Policy on
Student Academic Appeals can only be made on defective or irregular procedural grounds. See
7.4.2 below.
The University of St Andrews is a charity registered in Scotland, No: SC013532

7.3 How to make an appeal
Should a student wish to appeal an outcome (including either a decision or a sanction, or both), they
must write to the Dean of Learning and Teaching (UG), or to the Provost (PGT/PGR), as appropriate,
with their grounds for appeal (see 7.2.1 and 7.2.2. above) within five working days of the decision
and copy in goodacpractice@st-andrews.ac.uk.
If the appeal is made against any part of a GAP outcome (including either the decision, or the
sanction, or both) of either a School Board or a University Board, the Dean/Provost will consider the
request. If the Dean/Provost assesses that there are valid grounds for the appeal to be heard (as
per Section 7.2.2 above), the Dean/Provost will refer the request to the relevant route of appeal as
detailed below.
There is no route of appeal against the Dean/Provost’s decision whether or not to refer the request.
7.4 Routes to appeal.
Routes to appeal are determined on the basis of the issuing authority of the outcome.
7.4.1 Appeal referred to a University Board
Any outcome issued by a School Board will be referred to a University Board.
This route of appeal within 7.4.1 will constitute a Stage 1 appeal for the purposes of the University
Policy on Student Academic Appeals. If a student remains dissatisfied with the outcome of this
appeal, the student may have a further and final route of appeal through making a Stage 2 Appeal
submission to Senate Office (see 7.4.2 below).
7.4.2. Appeal referred to University Senate (Stage 2)
Any outcome issued by a University Board will be referred to the University Senate.
This route of appeal within 7.4.2. will constitute a Stage 2 Senate level appeal for the purposes of
the University Policy on Student Academic Appeals and will be governed by provisions within that
policy.
Note that, as per B.1.33 in the Student Academic Appeals policy, a Stage 2 appeal may only be
made on the grounds of defective or irregular procedure that has materially affected the academic
decision of the relevant Board of Adjudication. Please see the Student Academic Appeals Policy
(Stage 2 appeal (Senate level)) for more information.

References (using APA Style 6th Edition)
QAA. (2017). Contracting to Cheat in Higher Education: How to Address Contract Cheating, the Use
of Third-Party Services and Essay Mills. Retrieved from https://www.qaa.ac.uk/docs/qaa/qualitycode/contracting-to-cheat-in-higher-education.pdf?sfvrsn=f66af681_10
University of St Andrews. (2018). Training in Good Academic Practice. Retrieved April 8, 2019, from
https://moody.st-andrews.ac.uk/moodle/course/index.php?categoryid=160

The University of St Andrews is a charity registered in Scotland, No: SC013532

Version Purpose / changes
number

Document
status

Author of
changes, role
and school /
unit

Date

01
02

Revisions to policy
Amendment to Policy
(Section 6)
Addition to 3.5 to take into
consideration
consequences of Covid19
Changes to titles/contact
details to reflect decanal
restructuring
Minor
amendments/updates to
the Policy.
Inclusion of unauthorised
use of AI as a distinct
category of misconduct.
Update following Senate
approval of AI Principles

Updated
Updated

-

2018/19
March 2020

Updated

-

April 2020

Updated

-

February 2021

Updated

-

August 2021

Updated

Update following Senate
approval to remove the
requirement for
unauthorised use of AI
cases to be heard at
University level Board.
Two changes following
Senate approval: Section
6 appeals and escalations
and Section 3.3
enhanced process for
GAP PGR cases.
Clarification of timelines
for summons letters at the
ends of semesters.
Updated role titles and
references to support
services.

Updated

Academic Policy March 2023
Officer
(Taught
Degrees)
Academic Policy December 2023
Officer
(Taught
Degrees)
Academic Policy May 2024
Officer
(Taught
Degrees)

Minor changes actioned
to reflect role changes
from AVP Dean of
Learning and Teaching to
Dean of Learning and
Teaching and Provost as
separate posts. New
bullet point added under
section 3.5 added to

03

04
05
06
07
08

09

9.1

9.2

Updated

Updated

Academic Policy January 2024
Officer
(Taught
Degrees)

Updated

Academic Policy August 2025
Officer (Digital &
Student
Experience)

Updated

Academic Policy September
Officer
(Taught 2025
Degrees)

The University of St Andrews is a charity registered in Scotland, No: SC013532

9.3

9.4

9.5

reflect University’s
position on
communicating bad news
to students on a Friday.
Minor and factual
correction: Clarifying in
section 3.8 that there are
different processes for
class tests and exams.
Minor update to 2.1 and
footnote 1 to clarify the
role of the Provost and
delegation to the
Associate Provost
4 groups of changes
implemented following
approvals in 2025/26. 1)
Updated to clarify
applicability of policy
regarding taught
component of PGR
degrees; 2) Updated to
clarify applicability of
policy regarding Microcredentials; 3) Updated to
further clarify remit of
Provost in relation to PGT
students and cases in
GAP; 4) Updated
following Phase 1 of GAP
review in 2025/26,
effective from AY
2026/27. Academic
misconduct types
updated – Notable
changes are: UUAI,
Contract Cheating, and
Plagiarism combined as
one; Falsification and
False Citation combined
as one; Language
Correction Policy brought
into GAP.

Updated

Academic Policy November 2025
Officer
(Taught
Degrees)

Updated

Academic Policy February 2026
Officer
(Taught
Degrees)

Updated

Academic Policy June 2026
Officer
(Taught
Degrees)

The old version (9.4)
continues to be in force
for the remainder of
2025/26, inclusive of all
submissions due before
end of August 2026.

The University of St Andrews is a charity registered in Scotland, No: SC013532
