Academic Integrity Policy,
Poor Academic Practice Procedure
and
Academic Misconduct Procedure

VERSION CONTROL STATEMENT
Version No:
Author:
Approved by:
Approval date:

8
Academic Registrar
Education Committee
11 August 2026

Page 1 of 25

Contents
Academic Integrity Policy, ................................................................................................................... 1
Poor Academic Practice Procedure ..................................................................................................... 1
and ...................................................................................................................................................... 1
Academic Misconduct Procedure ....................................................................................................... 1
Contents .............................................................................................................................................. 2
Introduction ........................................................................................................................................ 3
Academic Integrity Policy .................................................................................................................... 4
Purpose ............................................................................................................................................... 4
Deﬁnitions ........................................................................................................................................... 4
Scope ................................................................................................................................................... 5
Points of Policy .................................................................................................................................... 6
Poor Academic Practice Procedure ................................................................................................... 15
Academic Misconduct Procedure ..................................................................................................... 16
Nature of the Academic Misconduct Procedure ........................................................................... 16
Academic Misconduct Decisions ................................................................................................... 16
Irregularities during an Examination ............................................................................................. 16
Use of Similarity Checking Software ............................................................................................. 17
Postgraduate Research Work ........................................................................................................ 17
Academic Integrity Panel .............................................................................................................. 17
Academic Integrity Panel Outcomes ............................................................................................. 20
Classiﬁcations and Penalties ......................................................................................................... 22
Appeals.............................................................................................................................................. 25

Page 2 of 25

Introduction
The University’s Academic Integrity Policy, Poor Academic Practice Procedure, and Academic
Misconduct Procedure are all very closely linked with each other. To make it as easy as possible for
students and staff to access and read through all three, and understand how they are associated,
they are all contained within this one document.
The contents list below sets out the pages on which you can find information on specific topics, and
if you would like to jump to the policy or either of the procedures, you can click on these links to
take you to the relevant part of the document:
Academic Integrity Policy
Poor Academic Practice Procedure
Academic Misconduct Procedure

Page 3 of 25

Academic Integrity Policy
Purpose
1.

The University of Stirling is committed to protecting the quality and standards of its awards.
Consequently, the University seeks to promote and nurture academic integrity, support staff
academic integrity, and support students to understand and develop good academic skills that
facilitate academic integrity. In addition, the University deals decisively with all forms of academic
misconduct.

2.

The University has signed up to the QAA and Academic Integrity Advisory Group’s, ‘Academic
Integrity Charter’. This represents an institutional pledge to implement its principles and
commitments which include working with staff and students and, in collaboration across the
sector, to protect and promote academic integrity, and take action against academic misconduct.

3.

This policy sets out the University’s position in respect of academic integrity and exists in parallel
with the Academic Misconduct Procedure which provides the process through which the
University considers and responds to academic practice which may constitute academic
misconduct.

Deﬁnitions
4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

Academic Integrity
The University adopts the following statement to define academic integrity:
Academic integrity is acting consistently in accordance with the fundamental values of honesty,
fairness, responsibility, respect, trust and courage in your studies, research and conduct.1
Where a student does not act with academic integrity, their work or behaviour may demonstrate
poor academic practice or it may represent academic misconduct.
Academic Misconduct
The University defines academic misconduct as:
any act or attempted act that does not demonstrate academic integrity and that may result in
creating an academic advantage for you or another person, or an academic disadvantage for any
other member or member of the academic community.2
Assessment
Coursework, examination (remote or in-person, wherever taken), oral, skills assessment or class
test that is considered and/or marked by academic staff as part of the learning and teaching of a
module/programme.
Poor Academic Practice
The submission of any type of assessment with a lack of, or inadequate referencing which does
not effectively acknowledge the origin of words, ideas, images, tables, diagrams, maps, code,
sound and any other sources used in the assessment. Poor academic practice is further defined
and distinguished from plagiarism in paragraph 20.
Artificial Intelligence

Adapted from the International Center for Academic Integrity’s Fundamental Values of Academic Integrity,
https://academicintegrity.org/resources/fundamental-values
2
Adapted from the University of California at Berkeley’s, ‘Deﬁning Academic Misconduct’,
https://gsi.berkeley.edu/gsi-guide-contents/academic-misconduct-intro/deﬁnitions/
1

Page 4 of 25

Artificial Intelligence (AI), within the educational context, refers to a diverse range of software
tools and platform services3 such as but not limited to Microsoft Copilot, google Gemini, OpenAI,
ChatGPT, Anthropic Claude, that use computational methods to perform tasks traditionally
carried out by humans. The tasks include, but are not limited to, information retrieval,
summarisation, proofreading, rephrasing and paraphrasing, synthesising and repurposing
content, and providing interactive tutorial support. Responsible and transparent use of AI tolls
can, in certain circumstances, support teaching, learning and research. However, inappropriate
use such as unacknowledged reliance on AI-generated content, submitting AI output as one’s
own work, or failing to engage critically with content provided by AI, may constitute poor
academic practice or academic misconduct, depending on the module requirements and the
extent and nature of use.
Users should be aware of the current technical limitations of AI, including but not limited to:
generation of inaccurate or fabricated information, lack of source transparency, and reproduction
of unintended and potentially harmful biases embedded in training data. Furthermore, use of AI
platforms may raise ethical and legal concerns including violations of intellectual property rights,
privacy prompts and submitted content, and data protection, especially when personal or
unpublished work is input into these systems that, in turn, may become output to another user.
Given the rapid pace of change and ongoing development in AI technologies, the capabilities and
definitions of AI will continue to evolve. Practices and tools that are currently considered ‘artificial
intelligence’ may become commonplace or reclassified over time. As such, students and staff are
encouraged to remain informed about updates to institutional guidelines and to seek clarification
when in doubt.
The permitted use of AI for a particular assessment or learning activity should be explicitly
outlined by Module Coordinators or Supervisors and may differ between modules or contexts
according to the University of Stirling’s AI Assessment Scale. All staff and students must adhere
to the University’s principles of academic integrity and the requirements set within programmes.
9.

Different forms of Academic Misconduct are defined in paragraph 21.

Scope
10. Members of University of Stirling staff have a range of responsibilities in respect of this policy and
in operating the Poor Academic Practice and Academic Misconduct Procedures which they must
fully and consistently adhere to. Staff hold a further responsibility to consistently role-model
robust academic integrity. This includes visiting members of staff and teaching assistants
employed on a short or fixed term basis.
11. This policy, and the associated procedures on Poor Academic Practice and Academic Misconduct,
all apply to all University of Stirling students. This includes students on taught and research
programmes offered at Undergraduate and Postgraduate levels, visiting students and those
undertaking a University of Stirling programme through an integrated ISC/University of Stirling
route.
3

‘All tools’ encompasses Large Language Models (LLMs) and Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG)
Page 5 of 25

12. The policy and associated procedures also apply to students taking a University of Stirling
programme or a collaborative programme in which any part is delivered under the name of the
University of Stirling, through a partnership or integrated route. Whilst this policy and its
associated procedures will only apply to those parts of study provided by or under the name of
the University of Stirling, if a student receives any academic integrity-based outcomes or
penalties from the collaborative/partner institution, these will be counted within any
determination of an outcome or penalty under the University of Stirling Academic Misconduct
Procedure.
13. Matters of academic misconduct are considered through the Academic Misconduct Procedure
which accompanies and operates in parallel with this policy. However, where a student is
confirmed to have carried out academic misconduct and their actions may also represent nonacademic misconduct, the University may decide that it is necessary for action to be taken under
Ordinance 2, the Code of Student Discipline, in addition to the action taken through the Academic
Misconduct Procedure. Where this is the case, action under Ordinance 2 will be progressed after
the outcome of the Academic Misconduct Procedure has been determined.

Points of Policy
14. Academic integrity describes the values that are held as essential in UK Higher Education, and it
is expected that all staff and students demonstrate these values in all aspects of their academic
studies, research and conduct.
15. The six fundamental academic values the University of Stirling upholds are that staff and students
as members of the University community act consistently with:
• Honesty, and are truthful about which ideas are their own and which are from other people's
work in their learning, research and practice, and about the methods and results of their
research.
• Fairness, and do not take advantage of other people's work, for example, by pretending it is
their own work.
• Responsibility, by taking responsibility for their own learning, actively seeking out the
information they need to study effectively and, as part of the University community, sharing
responsibility for these values being upheld.
• Respect, and show respect for other students, staff and the work of others and expect the
same in return.
• Trust, and trust that they and the whole University community will act fairly and consistently
in protecting these values.
• Courage, and as part of the University community, show courage to uphold these values,
even when it is difficult to do so.
16. Promoting and upholding academic integrity is the collective responsibility of the University, its
staff and its students. All staff and students have a responsibility to contribute to the continuing
integrity and therefore quality of University of Stirling degrees, including by highlighting any acts
of academic misconduct or external sources that encourage and promote cheating, such as essay
mills.
Page 6 of 25

The University:
• Ensures, via the Education Committee and its sub-committees, that its Academic Integrity
Policy and associated procedures are robust and effective, and distributed widely to staff and
all students, and that steps are taken to support easy access and understanding of the policy
and procedures.
• Ensures that appropriate training in academic integrity, what constitutes academic
misconduct and good academic practice is available to all students and staff.
• Ensures that all students and staff have access to the University’s Academic Integrity Policy.
• Ensures that all academic staff are provided with the appropriate training in identifying and
dealing with academic misconduct.
• Provides accurate details on a student or staff member’s academic honesty and integrity in
any employer or professional body reference for a student or staff member in which such
information is requested.
Academic Staff:
• Should encourage students to explore sources of knowledge and collaborate while explicitly
and purposefully:
o Ensuring that all students for whom they provide supervision, or set and/or
assess/examine work, are provided with information on what is expected of them in
terms of academic integrity and the University’s Academic Integrity Policy, the academic
expectations and conventions in their field, and what constitutes good academic practice.
o Supporting and embedding academic skills development in reading, writing, referencing
and proof reading, which support good academic practice in their modules and
programmes.
o Designing assessments at module and programme levels in such a manner that makes
academic misconduct less likely (e.g. change questions regularly, set realistic assessments
in terms of level, load and submission dates, and provide formative assessments and
exemplars for students). Academic staff should therefore remain attentive to, and update
themselves about, technological changes that may influence academic assessments as
part of their continuous professional development. Priority should focus on assurance of
learning via any means possible that are appropriate to learning levels and to minimise
breaches of academic integrity.
o Setting appropriate conditions for group work and make it clear where the distinction lies
between group work and individual work.
o Cultivating a culture with their students of mutual respect for the production of one’s
own work. This pertains to both students’ work and staff outputs such as presentation
slides, grading comments and assessment design.
o Acting with academic integrity both broadly as a member of the University’s staff, and
when creating and producing their own academic work.
o Applying the Academic Integrity Policy and Academic Misconduct Procedure consistently
and fairly.
Students:
• The foundation of learning is sharing knowledge and collaborating with other others to create
new knowledge. Students are encouraged to share knowledge, work together, reflect on

Page 7 of 25

exemplars of good practice, offer and receive constructive feedback from peers and seek
guidance or support as required. In doing so, students must:
o Act with academic integrity.
o Submit for assessment only work that they produced themselves and which duly
acknowledges ideas, words and works of others that were used in the production of their
own work, as well as technological assistance they may have used to refine their outputs,
acknowledging limitations in a critical way.
o Follow the referencing guidelines for their discipline.
o Unless of the explicit purposes of peer learning, not share their individual work with
another student, friends, family members, other individuals, or online platforms for the
purpose of refining either their own output or somebody else’s.
o Not act in a way which enables, facilitates or encourages academic misconduct in others.
o Secure and always protect their work, including from unsolicited capture for AI training
purposes by online AI providers.
o Not discuss test/examination questions with anyone else while the test/examination is
taking place unless specifically permitted in the test/examination.
o Ensure that they act within the boundaries of the Academic Integrity Policy.
o Ensure that they act in accordance with the University’s policy on Audio Visual Material
to Support Learning, and do not inappropriately share any audio-visual materials
prepared by the University.
o Secure the required ethical approval before undertaking research for dissertations and
theses.
o Proactively ensure they have a clear understanding of academic integrity and the
University’s expectations in relation to this, including through completion of any
academic integrity related training or tutorials that the University provides.
o Take the opportunity to use the similarity checking programme available within the VLE
to check the originality of their written work on all text-based assessments prior to final
submission.
o Use artificial intelligence tools, such as ChatGPT, ethically and within the guidelines issued
by the University and in connection with specific assessments.
17. Learning to express oneself in written English is an essential part of studying at a UK university.
The University recognises this is a learning process and that some students may benefit from
guidance offered by proof-readers. Details of who can be a proofreader, when they may be used
and how they should be acknowledged on the student’s work is set out in the University
Proofreading Policy.
18. Where a student does not act with academic integrity, their work may demonstrate poor
academic practice, or it may represent academic misconduct. One act of poor academic practice
would not constitute academic misconduct, however repeated acts could be considered as
academic misconduct.
19. Where academic misconduct is suspected or alleged after the University has confirmed and/or
granted an academic award or academic credit, the matter should be referred to Academic
Registry in the first instance via quality@stir.ac.uk. Academic Registry will work in collaboration
with the relevant Faculty and the University Chief Examiner, and progress consideration of the
matter as appropriate to the circumstances, and in broad alignment with the principles of this
policy and the Academic Misconduct Procedure.
Page 8 of 25

20. Poor Academic Practice
20.1.

Good academic practice is a skill which students take time to learn and develop through
repeated practice and with guidance and support. Therefore, instances of poor academic
practice can be part of the learning process. In the context of this learning process, it is the
responsibility of students to act as set out in paragraphs 15 and 16, including to complete all
relevant training that is offered, ensure that the referencing guidelines for their discipline are
followed, and seek support where required.

20.2.

Poor Academic Practice occurs when a student submits any type of assessment that does not
properly acknowledge the origin of words, ideas, images, tables, diagrams, maps, code,
sound, and any other sources used in the assessment. It is distinguished from plagiarism in
the first instance by the volume of unacknowledged material and its distribution throughout
the assessment.

20.3.

Poor Academic Practice includes:
• Inappropriate quoting from sources, including artificial intelligence tools, whether or
not referenced in-text and/or in the bibliography: this can include directly quoting
material from a source without placing it in quotation marks; using short or larger
sections from one or more sources, omitting some words and/or changing the word
order, without using quotation marks and consequently presenting the work as your
own.
• Limited collaboration between students where the requirement is to submit individual
work: this occurs, for example, when students use the same structure, sources and/or
quotations in assessments that do not follow a prescribed structure.
• Lack of references in small sections of an assessment: this can include lack of in-text
and/or bibliographic references; referencing sources correctly in the bibliography but
omitting the references in the text or vice versa.
• Poor academic practice during closed book assessments: this includes, for example,
having a phone or electronic device on your person, even if it is switched off.

20.4.

One act of poor academic practice does not constitute academic misconduct. This includes
instances of poor academic practice in more than one assessment that are submitted around
the same time, and therefore before poor academic practice has been highlighted to the
student. However, any repeated act of poor academic practice after poor academic practice
issues have been raised with the student will normally be considered as academic
misconduct, depending on the severity of conduct and the engagement of the student in
developing their skills in this area.

20.5.

The steps that are to be taken in response to a case of poor academic practice are set out in
the ‘Poor Academic Practice Procedure’.

21. Academic Misconduct
21.1.

Academic misconduct can take several forms, although it should be noted that academic
misconduct does not include differences in opinion and interpretation of research results and
Page 9 of 25

data. The University recognises, amongst others, the following forms of academic
misconduct:
21.1.1. Contract Cheating
Contract cheating takes place when a student submits an assessment that was completed by
a third-party either for payment or for free. It is a broad category that includes, but is not
limited to, work bought from so-called essay mills, substantially unchanged/unmodified
output from an artificial intelligence tool, customised work commissioned from ghost writers,
and selling or exchanging work for use by others. A further example would be a friend or family
member completing an assessment for a student. Work in this category covers the whole
spectrum of assessment types. Any form of contract cheating constitutes academic
misconduct, often of the most serious form.
21.1.2. Inappropriate use of artificial intelligence tools
Using artificial intelligence tools effectively is an important skill for students to learn. However,
inappropriate use of artificial intelligence tools in preparing assessments breaches some or all
of the six fundamental academic values set out in paragraph 15. Examples are:
•

•
•
•

Submission of any form of assessment, which the student has not individually created or
written, as the content wholly or substantially originates from output of an artificial
intelligence tool.
When a student uses an artificial tool in breach of the Proofreading Policy.
Where an artificial intelligence tool has been used in a manner contrary to the instructions
of the particular assessment.
When part of an assessment originates from an artificial tool without appropriate
acknowledgement.

Guidance on appropriate use of artificial intelligence tools can be found in the student guide.
21.1.3. Plagiarism
Plagiarism (as distinguished from poor academic practice), can be defined as:
The practice of taking someone else’s work or ideas or words and passing them off as one’s
own.4
Plagiarism is a specific form of cheating which usually occurs when a student is working
independently on an assessment (e.g., essays, reports, presentations, or dissertations).
Examples of other people’s ‘work’ can include anything taken from any form of publications,
internet sources, the spoken word, graphics, data, and written text.
There are different forms of plagiarism including:
• The inclusion of extracts from another person’s work without the appropriate
acknowledgement of the original source(s), whether in its original form or in a
linguistically modified form.
• The summarising of another person’s work without acknowledgement.
• The substantial use of the ideas of another person without acknowledgement.
4

Adapted from the Oxford English Dictionary deﬁnition of plagiarism’,
Page 10 of 25

•
•

Including material from teaching resources in assessments without acknowledgement
of its origin.
The use of websites or software to mask or facilitate plagiarism. This includes platforms
oﬀering AI services that oﬀer automated summaries or collation of ideas that are based
on machine learning training of vast sources of online data without the consent or
proper identiﬁcation of their creators.

21.1.4. Self-plagiarism
Students may only submit an item of written work for assessment once during their studies at
the University of Stirling. Duplicate submission of the same work (whether in whole or in part,
e.g., re-using only a paragraph from previous submitted work), is not permitted unless it is
where:
• Resubmission is expressly required/allowed within the assessment instructions for the
module
• Assessment is being resubmitted after failing the module, as part of a resit attempt.
Duplicate submission of an item of written work in any other circumstance is not allowed and
constitutes academic misconduct.
Different forms of self-plagiarism include:
• Recycling the whole or parts of previously submitted assessment in the writing of another
assessment, even if due recognition of this is given in the references.
• Reusing the whole or part of assessment submitted in a different module in a different
subject.
• Reusing the whole or part of assessment submitted by the student to another educational
institution.
• NB: use of most external AI tools for rephrasing students’ own material to avoid selfplagiarism entails the risk of student's own work being used to train future generations of
AI services; while the rephrased output may be based on assessments submitted to
another institution - therefore this practice should be avoided.
21.1.5. Collusion
In simple terms, collusion is:
• When one student copies the work of another student either with or without the
knowledge of the original author; or
• When two or more students work together to produce an assessment that they are to
submit individually.
Collusion is not:
• Working on an assessment with members of a designated group of students as expressly
directed in assessment details in a module. Where the assessment is based on a single
piece of work produced by the group as a whole, students are expected to cooperate fully
in all phases of the project. However, any part of the work which should be completed
individually, and which contributes towards an individual student’s formal assessment
must be produced by that individual student alone.

Page 11 of 25

The actions of all students involved in a case of collusion will be considered through the
academic misconduct procedure, even when it is asserted that a student has copied another
student’s work without the knowledge of the authoring student. This is because it is the
responsibility of all students to ensure that their work is secure at all times, and therefore not
available to be copied by another student. The decisions regarding academic misconduct in
respect of each of the students may be different depending on the circumstances of the case.
It is noted that the use of AI tools to paraphrase other students’ work is strictly prohibited as
it constitutes a case of collusion.
Current rules about collusion are not intended to discourage students from sharing their work
with each other in a collegiate fashion for peer learning purposes. It is advisable however, to
be cautious of potentially harmful appropriations of one’s own work by others as well as
developing a sense of responsibility and respect across student cohorts.
21.1.6. Falsification
Data collected from observations, experiments, surveys, questionnaires, interviews, and polls
are often used in academic assessments. It is academically dishonest to report anything other
than the results obtained using the stated method of data collection. Falsification is the
fabrication or invention of data, information, or references in any formal academic exercise.
Falsification includes knowingly misrepresenting data and research to show either a different
process that was followed or a different end result from what was actually obtained or both.
In particular, students must not:
• Change or manipulate the method of data collection before the end of the data collection
period, unless a full account is provided in the final report.
• Change or omit data that has been collected without appropriate explanation and
justification.
• Add data collected outside the data collection period.
• Add fictitious data.
• Falsify data in order to make it fit a particular theory or preferred outcome.
Rules about falsification exclude cases where specific use of synthetic datasets or fictitious
scenarios and information are used in the context of mock exercises, designed by either
lecturers or students according to module specifications.

Page 12 of 25

21.1.7. Piracy
The deliberate exploitation of material objects, ideas, pieces of writing, code, software or
hardware from others without proper acknowledgement.
21.1.8. Impersonation
Students must not impersonate another student, nor allow themselves to be impersonated at
any time whether in a learning and teaching activity, in an assessment or at University
meetings. Furthermore, it is also unacceptable for a student to coerce another to produce an
assessment on their behalf.
21.1.9. Use of unfair means in an assessment taken under exam conditions
Some assessments, including examinations or class tests, may be conducted under exam
conditions. ‘Exam conditions’ refers to when an assessment is required to be completed by a
student: without consultation with others and within a set period of time. Students must not
use any unfair means in any assessment taken under exam conditions. Therefore, any unfair
means, including the following, are unacceptable during an assessment taken under exam
conditions:
• Unauthorised notes or information resources in any form, including AI tools.
• The use of a mobile phone unless authorised by the invigilator.
• The use of an electronic device, with the exception of digital exams where students are
permitted to use their own devices.
• The use of unauthorised calculators or dictionaries.
• The use of smart watches.
• Reading from another student’s work.
• Communicating with another student unless the activity is specifically permitted.
• Attempting to circumvent or circumventing online exam firewalls and other online
proctoring tools.
21.1.10. Bribery or Intimidation
All forms of bribery are illegal in the United Kingdom in terms of the Bribery Act 2010. In the
context of this policy, attempting to improperly influence a member of staff in order to
achieve an academic outcome through any means such as the giving of money or gifts, or
through intimidation constitutes academic misconduct. In addition, attempting to improperly
influence or intimidate another student to produce or share academic work constitutes
academic misconduct.
21.1.11. Dishonest Practice
Dishonest practice includes a wide variety of activities that aim to obtain an unfair advantage
through:
• Making false declarations to Faculties, Academic Staff members, Boards of Examiners or
Appeal Panels.
• Attempts to circumvent the similarity checking programmes that the University uses.
• Submitting documents which have been forged in any way.
• Attempting to gain or gaining access to examination or class test papers prior to their
release and/or sharing examination or class test papers prior to their release.

Page 13 of 25

•
•
•

Deliberate avoidance or refusal to engage with the relevant ethics review and approval
process.
Making false or misleading statements as to the extent to which, and how, artificial
intelligence tools were used in an assessment.
Making a false or misleading statement regarding proofreading.

21.1.12. Inappropriate use of proofreaders
Students must submit work which they have individually created or written. The University
Proofreading Policy sets out the parameters for the use of proofreaders and how their use
should be acknowledged. Breach of that policy will be regarded as inappropriate use of
proofreaders for the purposes of this policy and procedure This includes the use of AI tools
for proofreading purposes that may be used to inform text in terms of content in the same
way a human proofreader may also do by acting as ghost author - such a use of AI
proofreading tools beyond assistive purposes is also prohibited, unless tasks allow their use
for the purposes of formation of ideas or concepts.
22. Where the University considers that a student’s work may demonstrate academic misconduct,
this will be considered in line with the Academic Misconduct Procedure that accompanies this
policy.
23. Decisions taken under the provisions of the Academic Misconduct Procedure on whether or not
an allegation of academic misconduct is confirmed, the classification of academic misconduct
offences, and academic misconduct offences constitute academic judgement.
24. In respect of Agreed Records of University Accessibility Adjustments (ARUAAs), the University is
committed to providing an inclusive learning environment for all and recognises that some
students may be eligible for additional support or provision in relation to assessments as part of
an ARUAA or in the context of Extenuating Circumstances. ARUAAs may be established based on
a range of support requirements such as a diagnosed learning diﬃculty, ADHD, ASD, a mental
health condition, visual impairment, hearing impairment, long standing illness or health
condition, or physical/mobility diﬃculties. In cases where such adjustments have been approved,
permitted use of proofreaders, spell-checking tools, grammar aids, or speciﬁc AI functionalities
may be allowed to support equitable access to learning and assessment. Students are still
required to use AI appropriately according to the University Policy on the use of AI, and to adhere
to standards of academic integrity; this includes transparent acknowledgement of AI used.
Inappropriate use of AI (see Student Guidance on the Use of AI) will be considered under the
Academic Misconduct Procedure. Students with an ARUAA are asked to seek guidance on
assessment matters if needed.

Page 14 of 25

Poor Academic Practice Procedure
25. In line with the provisions of the Academic Integrity Policy, where one instance of poor
academic practice is demonstrated this will not constitute academic misconduct and the
student will be allowed to learn from the process (see paragraph 20.4). All cases of poor
academic practice should be explicitly highlighted in written feedback provided to the student
and it is the student's responsibility to seek additional guidance and support to ensure that the
poor academic practice does not re-occur.
26. Where there are particular concerns about the extent of poor academic practice or repeated
academic practice, the staff member assessing the piece(s) of work should advise the Subject
Chief Examiner and the Module Coordinator of this. The Module Coordinator (or nominee) will
arrange to have an Academic Practice Discussion with the student.
27. An Academic Practice Discussion is a less formal discussion than those that take place in line
with the Academic Misconduct Procedure and will include advising the student:
•
•
•
•

Of the poor academic practice issue(s);
On what constitutes good academic practice, and/or signpost them to sources of
guidance and support in order that the student can learn from this;
Of the requirement for them to complete relevant training on Academic Integrity;
That if the Academic Integrity training is not completed, or if further poor academic
practice is demonstrated, this would constitute academic misconduct and as such
would be considered further through the Academic Misconduct Procedure.

28. All instances of Poor Academic Practice should be submitted online via the Poor Academic
Practice Report Form. Data held in the central student management system will serve as a
point of reference in monitoring of Poor Academic Practice and compliance with conditions.
29. In marking the assessment(s) containing poor academic practice, all sections containing poor
academic practice will be excluded and the grade/outcome will be awarded solely on the basis
of the student’s own work.

Page 15 of 25

Academic Misconduct Procedure
Nature of the Academic Misconduct Procedure
30. The Academic Misconduct Procedure does not consider or set out to consider any matters which
are criminal in nature. Therefore, the procedure is not a legal proceeding and students may not
be legally represented within it and may not be accompanied to any meetings that take place
within the procedure, by an individual who is legally qualified, including where the individual is a
member of the University community.

Academic Misconduct Decisions
31. Decisions on whether or not an allegation of academic misconduct is confirmed are determined
on the balance of probabilities and as noted in paragraph 23, constitute academic judgement.
This means that even in circumstances where the available information or evidence may not be
100% definitive, a decision will be made on whether it indicates that academic misconduct is
more likely to have taken place than not. It is not required to prove intention for academic
misconduct to be confirmed as having taken place. Information to inform decision-making
regarding academic misconduct will be aligned with the particular circumstances of the case.
Information may be obtained, for example:
•

•
•
•
•
•

When similarity checking software (such as Turnitin) flags up sections in a student’s work
that are derived or taken verbatim from other published sources which are not
acknowledged in the text.
If a member of staff is able to locate specific source(s) that have been copied without due
acknowledgement.
If there is evidence from a student’s previous portfolio of work (including assignments and
examination scripts) that the work is not the student’s own.
If there is evidence of cheating such as having a set of notes in e.g. a pocket/stationery
case/similar.
Through any evidence of collusion having taken place via social media or other means,
including AI tools.
Through any evidence of using AI inappropriately.

Irregularities during an Examination
32. If an invigilator suspects academic misconduct during an assessment under examination
conditions the invigilator will inform the candidate of the misconduct behaviour they are
displaying. Any prohibited materials will be removed by the invigilator. The invigilator will
advise the candidate at the end of the assessment that an Invigilator Report form describing the
incident will be submitted to the relevant School/Subject Chief Examiner and that the Academic
Misconduct Procedure will be followed.
33. The invigilator will prepare and send the Invigilator Report as soon as possible after the event to
the relevant School/Subject Chief Examiner in order that this Academic Misconduct Procedure
can consequently be followed.

Page 16 of 25

Use of Similarity Checking Software
34. Final copies of all text-based assessments and PGR progress reports must be submitted
electronically through tools specified by the University, by the due date. The University makes
use of similarity checking software to check originality. The University protocol is that
assessments will be checked for originality after they have been marked. Undergraduate, and
postgraduate taught and research students in all years for all modules, are allowed open access
to the similarity checking programmes to check the originality of their written work on all textbased assessments prior to final submission. Staff of the University will only use such software
and methods of detection of misconduct as approved by the University.
35. While ultimately academic judgement will be exercised in determining if academic misconduct
had indeed taken place, similarity checking software is an important tool in detecting some forms
of academic misconduct. This software required to be used consistently and with consistency of
interpretation of scores, around the University. In all cases where similarity checking indicates
that academic misconduct may have taken place, this procedure should be invoked and followed.

Postgraduate Research Work
36. In the case of postgraduate research work that has been submitted for examination or for
purposes of progression or mandatory assessment prior to final submission, assessment of that
work should cease at the point academic misconduct is suspected, pending the outcome of
consideration of the matter in line with this procedure.
37. If academic misconduct is suspected in the thesis during the examination process, the
examination process must be stopped immediately, even if this is on the day of or in the oral
examination, pending the outcome of consideration of the matter in line with this procedure.
38. If academic misconduct is suspected in the thesis after the oral examination has taken place, but
before the award has been made, the award or conferment process should be suspended pending
the outcome of consideration of the matter in line with this procedure.
39. If academic misconduct is otherwise suspected in a PGR student’s work, the concern(s) should be
considered in line with this procedure.

Academic Integrity Panel
40. Matters of suspected academic misconduct are considered by an Academic Integrity Panel in line
with this procedure.
41. In all suspected cases of academic misconduct, the student must be:
a. made aware of the allegation against them in advance of a meeting of the Panel;
b. invited to attend or contribute to a meeting of the Academic Integrity Panel as
considered appropriate by the Panel and in line with the provisions of paragraph 42;
c. given information on how to access support from Student Learning Services, Student
Support Services, and the Students’ Union.
Consistent adherence to these and all points of procedure is essential to ensure students are
provided with all relevant details and to avoid decisions of an Academic Integrity Panel becoming
open to appeal on the basis of grounds relating to procedural irregularity.

Page 17 of 25

42. Where a suspected case of academic misconduct would represent a minor, moderate or major
offence if confirmed, Academic Integrity Panels have discretion to decide whether or not a
student’s attendance at the meeting of the Panel is necessary. As such, in these cases an
Academic Integrity Panel will decide whether to invite a student to attend the meeting or to
submit a short, written statement in advance of the meeting for the Panel to consider. Where a
suspected case of academic misconduct would represent a serious or gross offence if confirmed,
Academic Integrity Panels must invite the student to attend the meeting.
43. The Academic Integrity Panel will act under authority delegated to them from the Education
Committee and in line with this procedure to consider and make a decision on the specific case.
44. The Academic Integrity Panel membership will normally comprise the School/Subject Chief
Examiner who will act as Chair, and one other academic member of staﬀ from the relevant School,
normally the Module Coordinator. Where the suspected case of infringement involves more than
one module in a diﬀerent School or relates to processes regulated at Faculty level the meeting
will normally be chaired by the Faculty Chief Examiner.
45. The purpose of a meeting of the Academic Integrity Panel is for the Panel members to make a
decision on whether or not academic misconduct has taken place, and classify any offence that
is confirmed. It is not the business of the meeting to seek to determine intention.
46. The Panel should decide in each case whether or not the student is required to attend the
meeting. If not, the student should be made aware of the allegation(s) against them and that an
Academic Integrity Panel will consider and decide upon an outcome to the allegations, and given
the opportunity to provide any written information they wish the Panel to take into account. The
student should be given at least three working days to prepare and submit this written
information. Where a student does not submit any written information when they have been
invited to do so, this will not preclude the Academic Integrity Panel from deciding on the matter
and taking appropriate action in accordance with this procedure, and the Academic Integrity
Policy.
47. Meetings of the Academic Integrity Panel will normally take place in person. However, in some
circumstances, the University may decide that it is appropriate for a meeting to proceed
remotely, through electronic means. Where a student is to be invited to attend the Academic
Integrity Panel meeting, the provisions of paragraphs 47 to 54 are required to be followed.
48. Where a student is to attend an Academic Integrity Panel meeting, they should normally do so
individually. Where more than one student is involved in the suspected academic misconduct,
the Academic Integrity Panel has discretion to decide to meet with all the students involved as a
group in one meeting or in groups over a number of meetings. However, where this is the case,
each student must be given the opportunity to either also meet with the Panel individually, prior
to the meeting which also includes other students, or to provide any written information they
wish, for the Panel to consider.

Page 18 of 25

49. The student will be provided the opportunity within the meeting to respond to the allegation of
academic misconduct and to provide both verbal and written information that is relevant to their
response.
50. The student has the right to be accompanied at the meeting by one member of the University of
Stirling community who is one of the following: fellow student, staff member, or a representative
from the University of Stirling Students’ Union. This meeting is not a legal proceeding and
therefore a student may not be accompanied by an individual who is legally qualified, including
where the individual is a member of the University community. The accompanying person must
not have any involvement in the matter being considered by the Panel. Since the purpose of an
accompanying person will be to support the student, they will not normally be expected to
participate directly in the meeting.
51. No audio or video recording of the meeting is permitted, either by staff or by students. However,
students may take notes if they wish. As set out in paragraph 58, a report of the meeting is
prepared and provided to the student as a record of the meeting.
52. Faculties should consistently ensure that these meetings are convened as soon as possible.
Normally the timeline for a meeting to take place will be ideally no longer than 10 working days
after the suspected academic misconduct had been identified. However, timeline will be
dependent upon the particular circumstances, and the point of the academic year may not
support the ideal timeline being operated.
53. Students should be given notice, by email, of the meeting at least five working days before it is
due to take place. Students must notify the Faculty/School/Subject Chief Examiner of the name
and designation/role/position of any accompanying person, in accordance with paragraph 48 and
the relevant provisions of Ordinance 2, in advance of the meeting, and normally Aat least two
working days before the meeting. Should a student request to be accompanied by someone other
than an appropriate member of the University community, the Chair of the Academic Integrity
Panel has discretion to consider the request, however such requests will normally be turned
down. Should a student not provide advance notice of an accompanying person but go on to
attend the meeting with the person, the Chair of the Academic Integrity Panel has discretion to
decide whether it is appropriate for the meeting to proceed or if it would be more appropriate
for it to be re-scheduled.
54. It is the responsibility of the Chair to ensure that a constructive approach is adopted and
maintained in meetings, and that any Agreed Record of University Access Adjustments (ARUAA)
considerations are taken into account where required and appropriate adjustments made.
55. The failure of the student to attend the meeting will not prevent the Academic Integrity Panel
from deciding on the matter and taking appropriate action in accordance with this procedure,
and the Academic Integrity Policy. Where a student has documented good cause for being unable
to attend the proposed meeting, but indicates that they wish to attend, a suitable revised
meeting date must be arranged.
In cases of alleged contract cheating, it may be beneficial for the Panel to compare the work in
which academic misconduct is suspected with assessments previously submitted by the student.
Page 19 of 25

56. Where this is the case, at the meeting the student may be invited to
• Comment orally on the work they had submitted – e.g., defend/explain the main arguments
presented in the written work or discuss one aspect of the topic; and/or
• Write a short (100-200 word) summary of the main focus or arguments of the written work;
and/or
• Translate a short (100-200 words) section into the target language (in language and
translation modules).
In addition, consideration should be given by the Panel to the most appropriate overall approach
to considering cases of contract cheating. This should take account of e.g., the number of staff
members who will remain with the student while any written response is being prepared, the
recency of the work that was submitted, any support requirements that student may have.

Academic Integrity Panel Outcomes
57. Academic Integrity Panels are required to consider and decide upon the outcome in line with the
overall provisions of the Academic Integrity Policy and this procedure, and particularly with the
provisions relevant to classifications and penalties set out in paragraphs 68 to 77.
58. In all cases, Academic Integrity Panels will discuss and consider the case in private. As such, where
a student has attended the meeting, at the end of the meeting, they should be advised that
deliberations will be conducted privately and asked to leave the meeting at that point.
59. In all cases, the student should be advised of next steps, how and when they will receive
notification of the outcome. The Panel should also offer guidance to the student on where and
how to seek help and support.
60. Following the conclusion of the meeting of the Academic Integrity Panel and the Panel’s
deliberations, the Academic Misconduct Report Form should be completed and submitted online
by the Chair of the Panel, within three working days of the meeting. The information required
includes notes of the meeting and the discussion held, the decision of the Academic Integrity
Panel regarding: whether or not academic misconduct is confirmed; and where appropriate, the
offence and the proposed penalty, and clear justification for the decisions. The form also notes
that the offence classification/penalty requires to be ratified by the Student Administration Team
before considered confirmed.
61. In all cases where an Academic Integrity Panel decides that academic misconduct is confirmed
and the offence should be classified as either Serious or Gross, this decision should be
communicated to the Faculty Chief Examiner (FCE) for endorsement prior to the Academic
Misconduct Report Form being finalised. The endorsement of the FCE should be confirmed on
the form.

Page 20 of 25

62. The submission of the form attaches it to an e-mail which is sent to the student as a record of the
meeting. The entire form is also automatically sent to Student Administration in order to enable
the offence and penalty to be ratified and recorded. This ratification of the Academic Integrity
Panel’s decision on the offence and penalty acts as an opportunity for final consideration of
appropriateness and institutional consistency.
63. Should it be considered necessary, in ratifying an offence and/or penalty, further discussion with
the Panel Chair may take place.
64. Once ratified, Student Administration will send the student formal confirmation of the
Academic Integrity Panel’s decision, any offence that has been confirmed and any penalty that
is to be applied, within seven working days. The communication will also provide confirmation
as to whether the student should or should not continue with their studies and information on
support available and that will be provided. The Faculty and other relevant services will also be
provided with a copy of this communication.
65. Where an Academic Integrity Panel decides that no academic misconduct has occurred, this will
be communicated to the student by Student Administration. Where no academic misconduct is
confirmed, the same case may be considered again by an Academic Integrity Panel should new
information or evidence in relation to the case become available.
66. If the Academic Integrity Panel establishes that academic misconduct did take place, and the
offence is categorised as Serious or Gross, the communication to the student advising them of
the offence will also explain that the case will also be reported to Student Discipline and may
also be investigated under the University’s student disciplinary procedure, Ordinance 2, the
Code of Student Discipline. In addition, it should be made clear that the decision of the
Academic Integrity Panel and any associated penalties will stand, regardless of whether or not
student disciplinary action is progressed, and any outcome determined through that action.
67. If a student whose academic integrity is being considered through the Academic Misconduct
Procedure behaves in a way towards members of the Academic Integrity Panel, or other
individuals involved in the matter in a way which is abusive, intimidating or otherwise
inappropriate, they will be referred to the Student Discipline and their conduct may be
considered in line with the Ordinance 2, the Code of Student Discipline.
68. All confirmed offences will be reported to relevant Professional, Statutory and Regulatory bodies
(PSRBs) and Fitness to Practice Panels where this is considered relevant and required.
69. All confirmed instances of academic misconduct should be notified to the relevant Board of
Examiners through established Faculty procedures.

Page 21 of 25

Classiﬁcations and Penalties
70. The purpose of the Academic Misconduct Procedure is not solely punitive, in that opportunities
should be taken to facilitate a student learning from the experience so that it minimises the
likelihood of repetition in the future. All students with a confirmed academic misconduct
offence will be required to undertake academic integrity training and should be referred to
Student Learning Services for support as appropriate.
71. Where an Academic Misconduct penalty is applied, this will remain current throughout the
student’s programme of study, or another programme of study at the same level, where a
student decides to transfer to a different programme. However, should a student go on to begin
another programme at the University, at a higher level of study, no academic misconduct
offences/penalties will be carried over into that programme.
72. Where an academic misconduct offence is confirmed, the Academic Integrity Panel is required to
decide how the offence should be classified. The classification will inform the penalty to be
applied. Academic misconduct offences may be classified as follows:
a. Minor
b. Moderate
c. Major
d. Serious
e. Gross
73. In cases where a student is found to have demonstrated academic misconduct in more than one
assessment: if the second act of academic misconduct was undertaken before the student had
received the first notification that academic misconduct was suspected and this would be
considered by an Academic Integrity Panel; and these are the first occurrences of academic
misconduct, and each instance is subsequently categorised as a Minor or Moderate offence; the
penalty appropriate to the level of each INDIVIDUAL offence will be applied, but the offences will
not be concluded to represent an offence at the next higher level.
74. However, in cases where a student is found to have demonstrated academic misconduct in more
than one assessment, and the second case occurred after the meeting of the Academic Integrity
Panel took place to consider the first, the offences will usually represent an offence at the next
higher level.
75. The University seeks to operate this procedure to respond consistently and appropriately to
academic misconduct, and in a way which is fair. In determining the severity of an act of academic
misconduct and the penalty to apply, the Academic Integrity Panel will be guided by matters such
as the nature of the conduct, the level and year of study, the extent of the academic misconduct
and the impact of penalties on the student.
76. Whilst the Academic Integrity Panel can take directly relevant mitigating factors into account in
making its judgement on a case, it is important to note that the University does not accept a
student’s medical or personal circumstances as an excuse or reason for cheating. The established
procedures on extensions and extenuating circumstances allow medical or personal
circumstances that a student believes are impairing or have impaired their performance to be
considered. Consequently, a student’s medical or personal circumstances will not be a basis from
Page 22 of 25

which to exonerate a student from an offence of academic misconduct, other than in highly
exceptional cases where a student’s capacity was so severely impaired, they did not have the
ability to make rational judgements. In such cases, a referral should be made to the University’s
Fitness to Study procedure (via fitnesstostudy@stir.ac.uk) in order that the fitness of the student
to continue engaging with their studies can be appropriately considered.
77. Where an Academic Integrity Panel is minded to decide that a student has not committed
academic misconduct on the grounds that their rational judgment was impaired or, on the same
grounds, to mitigate and reduce a penalty which would otherwise have been appropriate in
respect of the offence, the endorsement of the relevant Associate Dean for Learning and
Teaching and the University Chief Examiner is required for the decision to become effective. The
purpose of this endorsement is to support consistency.
78. A brief range of examples of the kinds of misconduct which may be categorised under each of
these classifications, and possible penalties that may be associated with each is noted in the
table provided in paragraph 79. It is important to note however that each case of academic
misconduct will be considered on its own merits and the Academic Integrity Panel has the
authority to decide on the classification of offences as it considers most appropriate to the
circumstances. Therefore, an academic misconduct offence may be classified differently to what
is set out in paragraph 79, depending on the circumstances. Furthermore, the information
included in the table should not be considered to be exhaustive and is provided for the
purposes of exemplification only.
79.
Classification: Minor
Examples of Misconduct
• Academic misconduct where
the impact of the misconduct
made only a minor
contribution to the submitted
work.

Examples of Potential Penalties
The submission is graded however all sentences in the
assessment that contain academic misconduct are
excluded from marking, and the grade/outcome will be
awarded solely on the basis of what is the student’s own
work. In these circumstances, the student would continue
to have an opportunity for reassessment in line with the
Assessment Policy and Procedure. The student should
undertake academic integrity training and be encouraged
to seek guidance from Student Learning Services.

Page 23 of 25

Classification: Moderate
Examples of Misconduct
• Academic misconduct where
the impact of the misconduct
made a moderate contribution
to the submitted work.
• Any academic misconduct case
where the impact of the
misconduct made only a minor
contribution to the submitted
work, but where the student
has a previous academic
misconduct offence recorded
against them.
Classification: Major
Examples of Misconduct
• Academic misconduct where
the impact of the misconduct
made a majority contribution
to the submitted work.
• Any academic misconduct case
where the impact of the
misconduct made a moderate
contribution to the submitted
work and where the student
has a previous academic
misconduct offence recorded
against them.
• Circumventing of the similarity
checking programmes or online
proctoring tools.
Classification: Serious
Examples of Misconduct
•
•
•
•
•

Impersonation.
Dishonest Practice.
Falsification.
Contract Cheating.
Academic misconduct where
the impact of the misconduct
made a majority contribution
to the submitted work, and
where the student has a
previous academic misconduct
offence recorded against them.

Examples of Potential Penalties
The submission is graded however all sentences in the
assessment that contain academic misconduct will be
excluded from marking, and the grade
/ outcome will be awarded solely on the basis of what is
the student’s own work. For taught provision, the final
mark for the submission will be capped at the pass mark.
In these circumstances, the student would continue to
have an opportunity for reassessment in line with the
Assessment Policy and Procedure. The student should
undertake academic integrity training and seek guidance
from Student Learning Services.

Examples of Potential Penalties
Allocation of zero for the relevant assessment.
Thesis/dissertation not accepted in its present form but
the student given the opportunity to revise and resubmit
the thesis within three months. For taught provision, the
final mark will be capped at the pass mark.
Reassessment is allowed in line with the Assessment
Policy and Procedure if necessary/applicable.
The student should undertake academic integrity training
and be encouraged to seek guidance from Student
Learning Services.

Examples of Potential Penalties
Allocation of zero for the module, no reassessment
allowed, and unable to graduate with honours or
masters.
PGR thesis not accepted in its present form, student given
the opportunity to amend the affected portion only for
resubmission for an award at a lower level.
The student should undertake academic integrity training
and be encouraged to seek guidance from Student
Learning Services.

Page 24 of 25

Classification: Gross
Examples of Misconduct
• Bribery.
• Contract Cheating.
• Provision of material to an
essay mill or equivalent site.
• Any serious academic
misconduct case where the
student has a previous
academic misconduct offence
recorded against them.

Examples of Potential Penalties
Termination of studies and no award possible.
PGR thesis rejected and no degree possible to be
awarded.

Appeals
80. The University of Stirling Policy and Procedure on Academic Appeals exists to provide an
opportunity for a student to request a review of a decision made regarding an academic matter.
Where a student wishes to submit an appeal, they are required to do so on the appropriate
appeal form, and an appeal will only be considered by the University where there is both: a
right of appeal in respect of the decision the student wishes to be reviewed; and grounds for
appeal.
81. There is no right of appeal against a decision made on the basis of academic judgement, where
this judgement has been applied in line with the relevant policy and/or procedure.
82. The grounds for appeal are that the decision: was unreasonable because it did not adequately
take into account all the factors affecting the student’s performance; is procedurally incorrect
or has been taken in the absence of all the relevant information (for example, the existence of a
medical condition). Appeals are not considered on the grounds that academic performance was
adversely affected by factors such as ill-health if there is no contemporaneous, independent,
medical or other evidence to support this.

Page 25 of 25
