EDUCATION ENHANCEMENT
Student Discipline Procedure: Academic Misconduct
Version
No.

Description

Author

Approval
Body

Effective
Date

1.0

First Published Version

Quality Assurance and
Enhancement Team

Senate

Academic
year 2022/23

Quality Assurance and
Enhancement Team

Senate

Academic
year 2023/24

Quality Assurance and
Enhancement Team

Senate

Academic
year 2024/25

Quality Assurance and
Enhancement Team

Senate

April 2026

2.0

3.0

4.0

Incorporating minor
amendments and
clarifications to the
Procedure.
Incorporating minor
amendments and
clarifications to the
Procedure.
Incorporating minor
amendments and
clarifications to the
Procedure.

Review Date

August 2027

Section Responsible

Education Enhancement

Purpose of Policy/Procedure
This procedure details the University’s approach to managing allegations of Academic Misconduct.
This procedure seeks to ensure that all students are treated fairly, are not disadvantaged by
circumstances beyond their control, and that the standards of the University’s awards are maintained
in alignment with sector standards and expectations.

Scope of Policy/Procedure
This Procedure applies to any allegation of Academic Misconduct levelled at a registered student,
whether taking place on or off the University of Strathclyde campus, including within halls of
residence, face to face, by writing or in written, spoken or electronic communications including social
media. This also applies to summative, formative, and draft submissions of academic work.
The scope section of this procedure provides further detail on the range of circumstances in which
this procedure can be applied.

Student Discipline Procedure: Academic Misconduct

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Contents
INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................................................ 2
SCOPE ............................................................................................................................................... 3
LEGAL PROCEEDINGS AND STANDARD OF PROOF ................................................................... 5
EXAMPLES OF ACADEMIC MISCONDUCT..................................................................................... 5
PROCEDURAL STEPS ...................................................................................................................... 6
EARLY INTERVENTION/CAUTION ................................................................................................... 6
STAGE 1: MISCONDUCT OFFICER CONSIDERATION .................................................................. 7
STAGE 2: SENATE DISCIPLINE COMMITTEE ............................................................................... 11
RIGHT TO APPEAL ......................................................................................................................... 14
Appeals Against Stage 1 Outcomes ..................................................................................... 15
Appeals Against Stage 2 Outcomes ..................................................................................... 15
ANNEX 1 - ROLES........................................................................................................................... 18
ANNEX 2 – DEFINITIONS ............................................................................................................... 20
ANNEX 3 – EXAMPLES OF ACADEMIC MISCONDUCT ............................................................... 21

1

Student Discipline Procedure: Academic Misconduct

INTRODUCTION
1. All students of the University are subject to the jurisdiction of the Senate, both for their studies
and for their conduct. The University’s Charter decrees that Senate is responsible for the
academic work of the University, in teaching, in research and in knowledge exchange, and for
the regulation and superintendence of the education and discipline of the students of the
University (Charter 8).
2. Senate membership comprises the Principal, Vice Principal, Associate Principals, Executive
Deans, Heads of Academic Departments, student representatives elected by students of the
University, and elected academic professional services staff elected by the academic
professional staff of the University. The powers vested in Senate by the Charter and Statutes
are confirmed in Statute 3.6 and include ‘to regulate the discipline of the students of the
University’ (Statute 3.6.13).
3. When students register at the University, they agree to abide by the University’s constitutional
regulations, academic regulations, policies, procedures, codes of practice and guidance (known
collectively within this Procedure as ‘Regulations’). In cases where there is evidence to suggest
that the Regulations may have been breached, Senate delegates authority for initial
consideration of allegations of Academic Misconduct to Departments (as outlined in Annex 2,
the term ‘Department’ in this Procedure refers to Academic Department, Centre, Faculty,
Directorate or Service). Some of these cases are escalated to Senate and may be heard by a
Senate Discipline Committee (see paragraph 61 onwards) and, upon appeal, a Senate
Discipline Appeals Board (see paragraph 78 onwards). Senate delegates its powers to:
a. Departments to impose all penalties listed in paragraph 35;
b. Misconduct Officers to impose all penalties listed in paragraphs 35 and 55;
c. A Senate Discipline Committee and a Senate Discipline Appeals Board to impose all
penalties listed in paragraphs 35, 55 and 74.
4. These penalties will be imposed without referral to Senate for approval, although Senate does
receive anonymised reports on outcomes of cases at Stage 2 (see paragraph 104).
5. To operate effectively, all organisations need to set standards of conduct to which their
members are expected to adhere. This Student Discipline Procedure (the “Procedure”) focuses
on Academic Misconduct and sets out the University of Strathclyde’s approach to reporting,
investigating and responding to alleged breaches of University Regulations (as hereinafter
defined) relating to Academic Misconduct, by students of the University. It also sets out the
penalties that may be incurred because of a breach of Regulations. Annexes 1 and 2 provide a
list of roles and definitions, respectively, referred to within this Procedure.
6. It is important to note that this Procedure does not constitute a legal or criminal process,
however the Procedure is underpinned by the relationship, signed at registration, between the
University and the student.
7. For the duration of the implementation of this Procedure, Reported Students will normally be
allowed to continue their studies. If the Reported Student’s behaviour is negatively impacting on
other students and staff, either in terms of disruption or in a manner in which raises safety
concerns (both for the Reported Student or anyone else), the Reported Student may be

2

Student Discipline Procedure: Academic Misconduct
restricted, at any stage in this Procedure, from accessing University services, buildings and/or
other property, as a precautionary measure.
8. Guidance for staff on this Procedure is available from the Senate Office. The Strath Union
Advice Hub offers independent advice and guidance to students on this Procedure and related
matters.
9. Allegations of Non-academic Misconduct, i.e. those that are linked to behaviour rather than the
production of academic work, are managed through the Student Discipline Procedure: NonAcademic Misconduct. If allegations of both types of misconduct are made against a student, the
two procedures will normally be followed concurrently. In some cases, multiple inquiries may
converge at the discretion of Misconduct Officers and, in cases that have been escalated to a
Senate Discipline Committee, at the discretion of the University Secretary (or nominee).
10. If a case of Academic Misconduct is raised, or is already in process, for a student whose
graduation could be imminent, the student may be prevented from graduating while the case is
under consideration. Consequently, the award will be made (if eligible) once the case is
concluded.
11. In implementing this Procedure, the University will remain mindful of its duty of care in respect of
the confidential and sensitive nature of disciplinary matters. It will also observe its obligations
under the Data Protection Act 2018/General Data Protection Regulation. All University staff,
students, Professional Advisors, Representatives/Supporters of Reported Students, and
witnesses involved in any allegation of Academic Misconduct have a duty to the Reported
Student, Reporting Person and to any witnesses or others providing evidence, to limit any or all
disclosure. This is crucial both for the Reported Student’s and, where applicable, the Reporting
Person’s, wellbeing, and to ensure that potential criminal proceedings are not prejudiced. The
Reported Student is also expected to respect the confidentiality of the process. It is of course
reasonable for Reported Students to discuss the disciplinary process with family and close
friends.
12. The University reserves the right to put a student’s academic work through similarity checking
software, such as Turnitin, as part of a misconduct investigation process. The University does
not endorse or permit the use of any Artificial Intelligence detection tools or services to
determine if the unauthorised use of Generative AI has taken place, and does not permit the
submission of students' work to these tools or services.

SCOPE
13. This Procedure applies to any allegation of Academic Misconduct levelled at a registered
student, whether taking place on or off the University of Strathclyde campus, including within
halls of residence, face to face, by writing or in written, spoken or electronic communications
including social media. This also applies to summative, formative, and draft submissions of
academic work.
14. This Procedure applies to students undertaking a professional placement, undertaking non
credit-bearing modules within the Centre for Lifelong Learning, studying by distance learning, by
blended learning or studying at another institution (e.g. through an exchange or on a
collaborative programme).

3

Student Discipline Procedure: Academic Misconduct
15. In exceptional cases, the University may decide to hold a hearing for a student previously
registered at the University of Strathclyde. This will be in cases where a decision relating to the
award of the University is required, in relation to Academic Misconduct, despite the student no
longer being registered at the University.
16. For students registered at the University who are studying at another institution, the allegation of
Academic Misconduct is usually considered by the Host Institution, but this does not preclude
input from the University of Strathclyde in cases where it is not the Host Institution. Nor does it
prevent the University of Strathclyde from undertaking its own separate investigation under this
Procedure and applying appropriate penalties as it sees fit.
17. The University reserves the right to continue to consider and conclude a disciplinary case in a
Reported Student’s absence if they choose to withdraw from the University while the case is
being considered. Reported Students whose registration is withdrawn by the University will not
normally be taken through this Procedure, (unless in the exceptional circumstances outlined in
paragraph 15). In cases where Reported Students are appealing a withdrawal from studies by
the University of Strathclyde at Stage 1 or Stage 2 of the Academic Appeals Procedure, any
discipline process under this Procedure will be put into abeyance until such appeals process is
concluded. If the Reported Student is allowed to resume registration, any discipline process
under this Procedure will recommence at the stage at which it was put into abeyance.
18. If the University uncovers further incidence(s) of misconduct from previous years of study, it has
the right to withhold or re-classify a student’s award (or re-consider progression).
19. In some cases, where contravention of the Regulations leads to concerns regarding a Reported
Student’s fitness to practise, the University may, separately from this Procedure, implement a
Fitness to Practise procedure. If a Reported Student is involved in a Fitness to Practise hearing
or follow up action plan, the University Secretary (or nominee) reserves the right to postpone
any concurrent disciplinary processes, under this Procedure, whilst these matters are
concluded. It is important to note that a decision to halt a disciplinary process for this reason will
only be taken to benefit the Reported Student.
20. This Procedure has an associated right to appeal, set out in paragraph 78 onwards below.
Reported Students also have the right to make a complaint at any point in the disciplinary
process under this Procedure, through the University’s Complaints Handling Procedure.
21. Strath Union has procedures for addressing discipline-related issues within their premises and
under the auspices of Strath Union activity, such as societies, sports clubs and Strath Union
meetings. However, such matters may also be referred to the University for consideration under
this Procedure.
22. Reported Students who consider they have a disability or condition that affects their ability to
engage with the disciplinary processes under this Procedure should disclose this to the
Misconduct Officer or Senate Office, as appropriate, with relevant evidence provided to allow for
an assessment and, where found applicable, for a reasonable adjustment to be made during the
handling of the case. Advice and support can be sought from the Disability & Wellbeing Service.
23. A Reported Student who requires language or communication support, for example British Sign
Language or spoken language translation, can request this for Stage 1 interviews and Stage 2
Senate Discipline Committee hearings conducted under this Procedure. Requests must be

4

Student Discipline Procedure: Academic Misconduct
made in advance, and will be facilitated by the University where reasonably practicable. Friends
or family members of the Reported Student must not be used for this purpose.

LEGAL PROCEEDINGS AND STANDARD OF PROOF
24. There may be instances where an alleged act of Academic Misconduct may also constitute a
criminal offence, for example theft of work, fraud etc. It is important to note that the nature and
scope of an internal University disciplinary process, under this Procedure, and the nature and
scope of a criminal process are fundamentally different. Any disciplinary process is a civil matter
where the alleged Academic Misconduct is more likely than not to have occurred. In contrast,
the criminal process is an external procedure and the standard of proof for the allegation to be
proven is beyond reasonable doubt.
25. Where the University of Strathclyde has reason to consider that a crime may have been
committed, the University/University Secretary reserves the right to report the matter to the
police and/or other appropriate UK authority. The University’s Procedure for Managing Students
with Criminal Proceedings or Unspent Criminal Convictions confirms arrangements for declaring
unspent criminal convictions and charges pending trial.
26. Where an alleged case of Academic Misconduct is subject to criminal or civil legal proceedings,
the University may:
a. Decide to hold in abeyance any relevant disciplinary process under this Procedure until
such time as the legal proceedings have concluded;
b. Take advice as is appropriate to ensure University investigations do not prejudice judicial
process;
c. Impose restricted access to University services, buildings and other property on the
basis of ensuring the safety and wellbeing of the Reported Student and other students
and staff.
27. Where any disciplinary process under this Procedure has been put in abeyance pending the
outcome of criminal or civil legal proceedings, the Reported Student has an obligation to keep
the University informed, in writing, of the progress of those legal proceedings, and to confirm the
outcome of any such proceedings within one week of conclusion, as detailed in the University’s
Procedure for Managing Students with Criminal Proceedings or Unspent Criminal Convictions.
28. If a Reported Student is convicted of a related criminal offence, then this conviction can be relied
upon to establish a disciplinary offence. If a Reported Student is found not guilty of a criminal
offence or the case is not proven, the University can still take disciplinary action against the
Reported Student if there is sufficient evidence that a breach of the Regulations occurred.

EXAMPLES OF ACADEMIC MISCONDUCT
29. The following are provided as examples of academic misconduct and further details can be found
in Annex 3 to this Procedure. This list of examples is not exhaustive and does not preclude the
University from instigating this Procedure to investigate other types of academic misconduct as
they occur:
a. Plagiarism (including poor academic practice around referencing and acknowledging
sources);
b. Duplication of submitted work (including self-plagiarism);

5

Student Discipline Procedure: Academic Misconduct
c. Working in ways or obtaining information not permitted by the terms of the assessment or
cheating in any assessment (including procuring, purchasing and submitting the work of a
third-party);
d. Collusion (including working or communicating with others to complete an individual
assessment, knowingly allowing work to be copied in any way, and/or providing work to a
third party with the intention of facilitating plagiarism);
e. Fabrication or deliberate misrepresentation of information;
f. False candidature or impersonation;
g. False declarations;
h. Offering or accepting any kind of bribe or threatening or coercing others in relation to
assessments at and/or in association with the University;
i.

Research misconduct, including behaviours or actions that fall short of the standards of
ethics, research and scholarship required to ensure that the integrity of research is
upheld.

PROCEDURAL STEPS
30. The main body of this Procedure sets out the steps to be followed in alleged cases of Academic
Misconduct.
31. The University of Strathclyde operates a tiered process for managing alleged cases of Academic
Misconduct as follows:
a. Early Intervention/Caution;
b. Misconduct Officer consideration (Stage 1);
c. Escalation to a Senate Discipline Committee (Stage 2).
32. Following the implementation of Stage 1 and Stage 2 of the Procedure, the Reported Student
has a right to appeal.

EARLY INTERVENTION/CAUTION
33. Considering and using disciplinary action at an early stage can prevent more serious offences or
issues arising. The University of Strathclyde views this Procedure as part of a supportive and
educational approach, as Academic Misconduct may be the first indicator of underlying
challenges. The Early Intervention/Caution stage of this Procedure can provide Reported
Students with an opportunity for reflection and learning.
34. For allegations where there are significant concerns for the health and safety of students and
staff, cases will automatically progress to Stage 1. Due to the serious nature of cases involving
the offering or accepting of any kind of bribe or threatening or coercing others in relation to
assessments at and/or in association with the University, which often represent situations where
concerns regarding student and staff health and wellbeing are evident, these cases will
automatically be escalated to Stage 1 of this Procedure. The examples provided here are not
exhaustive and there may be other cases which will automatically progress to Stage 1 at the
discretion of the Department.
35. Through Early Intervention/Caution, the Department will be able to apply one or more of the
following recommendations:
a. No further action required;

6

Student Discipline Procedure: Academic Misconduct
b. Reported Student to rewrite and resubmit the assessment, with appropriate referencing.
However, this will not result in any change to the mark assigned to the assessment;
c. Reported Student asked to read the guidance made available to them from the University
and to confirm understanding of this, in writing, to the Department;
d. Reported Student required to attend specific workshops or training events;
e. Reported Student referred to the University’s Study Skills Department for support;
f. Reported Student referred to the University’s In-sessional General English and English for
Academic Purposes service for support;
g. Reported Student referred to the University of Strathclyde’s Support and Wellbeing
Services;
h. Any other recommendation not affecting registration or progress of studies deemed
appropriate by the Department.
36. The recommendations listed above are supportive in nature. A Department cannot change the
mark assigned to an assessment as part of a recommendation in the Early Intervention/Caution
stage of this Procedure.
37. In cases where the Department has decided that action is required (see 35b to h above), they
will produce an Early Intervention/Caution Form detailing any sanctions deemed appropriate.
This will be shared with the Reported Student and with the Senate Office (see Table of Roles in
Annex 1).
38. Failure to complete any actions by the deadlines assigned, will normally result in a Misconduct
Officer being appointed to consider the case at Stage 1 (see paragraph 40 onwards).
39. If a Reported Student does not accept the outcome of Early Intervention/Caution, the matter will
automatically be escalated to Stage 1 of this Discipline Procedure for consideration.

STAGE 1: MISCONDUCT OFFICER CONSIDERATION
40. For cases where the following apply, Stage 1 of this Procedure will be implemented:
a. Allegations fall within the categories outlined in paragraph 34 above; or
b. The Reported Student does not accept the Early Intervention/Caution recommendations
that are put in place; or
c. The Department believes that a full Stage 1 investigation is appropriate, for example,
due to repeated Academic Misconduct allegations and/or because measures put in place
at a previous Early Intervention/Caution have not been adhered to.
41. A Misconduct Officer will be appointed by the Head of Department to investigate the allegations
of misconduct. The Misconduct Officer should not be the Reported Student’s supervisor. The
Senate Office SharePoint site provides detailed information, guidance, and templates for
Misconduct Officers to support the implementation of this Procedure.
42. For more complex cases Misconduct Officers are advised to contact the Senate Office at the
start of the process if they have concerns.
43. Where a programme is jointly delivered with another Faculty or Department, or a module is open
to students across Departments or Faculties, the Misconduct Officer must inform the Reported
Student’s host Department that an allegation of academic misconduct is being investigated. The
Misconduct Officer should confirm with the host Department whether a penalty has or could
7

Student Discipline Procedure: Academic Misconduct
have an impact on a student’s final outcome or opportunity to progress as planned in their
studies. This should be done in advance of any outcome being confirmed with the student.
44. Any Stage 1 consideration of an alleged act of Academic Misconduct shall normally include an
interview with the Reported Student by a Misconduct Officer for the purposes of setting out the
allegations/issues to be investigated, understanding the Reported Student’s position and to
present any evidence obtained. However, in cases where allegations against five or more
Reported Students relate to the same incident, the Department may choose to request a written
statement from the Reported Students, (responding to the case and the evidence presented), in
lieu of an interview. This does not preclude an interview from being held later if this is felt
necessary by the Department, or at the request of the Reported Student, for example to clarify
elements of the written statement or discuss emerging evidence.
45. If there are concerns around the authorship of an assessment that may form part of an
allegation of Academic Misconduct, Misconduct Officers are permitted to include questions of an
investigatory nature specific to the assessment within the Stage 1 Investigation Interview. This
could be relevant for cases involving alleged collusion, contract cheating, the use of Generative
AI etc. In these cases Misconduct Officers can use a portion of the Stage 1 Investigation
Interview to explore the Reported Student’s engagement with the assessment including their
understanding of the source material, key concepts in the subject area, the research
methodology used, and their approach to writing and completing the assessment. This may help
Misconduct Officers to establish the authorship of assessments. Please note, a student must be
explicitly informed that there will be investigatory questions into authorship asked as part of the
Stage 1 Investigation Interview, and referred to this paragraph for information on what this may
entail. If work previously submitted by the Reported Student is being considered to compare the
consistency of submissions this must be included as evidence and be shared with the student in
advance of the Stage 1 Investigation Interview.
46. The Misconduct Officer should contact the Reported Student with a proposed date and time for
the interview at least five working days in advance of the interview date. The student will be
notified of/provided with:
a. The details of the alleged offence;
b. The evidence under consideration, including any witness statements;
c. Information relating to penalties which may be imposed if the alleged offence is admitted
or found to be proven;
d. Their right to be accompanied (or represented in their absence) by a Supporter and/or
Representative;
e. Their right to submit evidence to the Misconduct Officer in advance of the interview;
f. Their right to submit a written statement in response to the alleged offence(s) to the
Misconduct Officer in advance of the interview;
g. Their right to identify witnesses in support of their case;
h. Confirmation that questions investigating authorship will be asked (if relevant);
i. Confirmation of the name and job role of any other members of staff who will attend the
interview;
j. Confirmation of whether any Professional Advisers of the University will attend the
interview;
k. A link to this Academic Misconduct Procedure.
47. The Reported Student shall be asked to confirm attendance at least three working days in

8

Student Discipline Procedure: Academic Misconduct
advance of the date of the interview. The Reported Student may request an alternative date, no
more than once. The alternative date should fall within a timescale that does not extend past
fifteen working days from the date that the Misconduct Officer contacted the Reported Student
to arrange the interview.
48. Any Reported Student asked to attend a Stage 1 interview is encouraged to seek support and
guidance from the Strath Union Student Advice Hub.
49. Failure by the Reported Student to respond to a request for interview or to attend an interview
on an agreed date will not stop the case from being progressed by the Misconduct Officer. In
exceptional circumstances, it may be possible for a Reported Student to submit a written
statement to the Misconduct Officer with their prior agreement. This will only be possible in
cases where there is an acceptable and evidenced reason why the Reported Student is unable
to attend an interview in person or virtually.
50. Reported Students may submit evidence to the Misconduct Officer, either in advance of the
interview or at the interview. Guidance for students on producing evidence for consideration at
any stage of this Procedure is available online and should be utilised by Reported Students
when they are preparing a submission of evidence
51. The Reported Student may be accompanied to the interview by a Supporter and/or a
Representative, (see Table of Roles in Annex 1), of the Reported Student’s choice. As stated in
the Table of Roles, the Representative may address the Misconduct Officer on the Reported
Student’s behalf if requested to do so by the Reported Student. The Supporter has no formal
role in the meeting, although they will be invited to state their name and relationship to the
Reported Student. Further information on these roles is set out below:
a. Supporters and Representatives are expected to conduct themselves in a polite and
respectful manner throughout the proceedings;
b. Supporters are not expected to answer questions on behalf of the Reported Student or
make statements to the Misconduct Officer. They may ask for clarification on any points
discussed during the interview, when invited to do so by the Misconduct Officer;
c. Supporters and Representatives are not permitted to ask questions of witnesses, unless
directed to do so by the Misconduct Officer in the case of Representatives, with the
agreement of the witness beforehand;
d. Supporters and Representatives are not expected to interrupt the proceedings. If there
are interruptions, the proceedings may be adjourned and when reconvened the Reported
Student may be asked to bring an alternate Supporter and/or Representative.
52. Following the interview, the Misconduct Officer will consider the evidence collected during the
investigation. If the Reported Student has presented new evidence at the interview, it may be
necessary for the Misconduct Officer to make further enquiries and meet with witnesses again or
with any new witnesses, as necessary. It may also be necessary to hold a further interview with
the Reported Student, for which the process set out in paragraph 41 onwards will apply.
53. In cases where further time is required to gather additional evidence or clarify details, or where a
follow-up interview is required, the Misconduct Officer will write to the Reported Student to
confirm a timescale by which they will be informed of the outcome. This will not normally total
more than 30 working days since the date of the interview with the Reported Student, however
in complex cases more time may be required. The Misconduct Officer is responsible for keeping

9

Student Discipline Procedure: Academic Misconduct
the Reported Student informed of any delays, the reasons for this and the revised timescales.
54. In reaching their conclusion, the Misconduct Officer may decide to dismiss the allegation on the
grounds that it has not been possible to establish, on the balance of probabilities, that the
Academic Misconduct occurred. Such a finding will be reached in the following circumstances:
a. A lack of demonstrable evidence that proves, on the balance of probabilities, that the
alleged Academic Misconduct took place as reported;
b. Parties involved have offered conflicting versions of events and are found by the
Misconduct Officer to be reliable witnesses, making it impossible to arrive at a
conclusion.
55. If the Misconduct Officer upholds the allegation of Academic Misconduct on the grounds that
either the evidence obtained demonstrates that it is likely that Academic Misconduct has
occurred, and/or the Reported Student admits responsibility for the Academic Misconduct they
are accused of, they will impose one or more of the following penalties:
a. Any of the recommendations set out in paragraphs 35 above, for Early
Intervention/Caution;
b. Reported Student issued with a written warning, setting out terms for the student’s
continued registration at the University of Strathclyde and timelines within which any
specific actions must be taken;
c. A reduction of the mark assigned to the assessment/s in question is applied, up to and
including awarding a zero with no right to resubmit;
d. A reduction of the mark assigned to the assessment/s in question is applied, up to and
including a zero with the right to resubmit, either as a first or second attempt;
56. A Misconduct Officer may also refer a case for consideration under Stage 2 of the Procedure.
Referral to Stage 2 will normally occur in instances where there is a repeated offence, with
previous offence(s) having been formally investigated under Stage 1. Referral to Stage 2 will
also be required where the penalty that the Misconduct Officer determines should be imposed
has/could have an impact on a student’s final outcome or opportunity to progress as planned in
their studies. Misconduct Officers are empowered by Senate to use their judgement to
determine whether a case should be referred to Stage 2.
57. The Misconduct Officer will write to the Reported Student confirming the outcome of the Stage 1
Investigation and provide the notes of the Stage 1 investigation meeting. The outcome should
confirm any penalties being applied, or that the case is being referred for consideration under
Stage 2 of the Procedure. Where the case is being referred under Stage 2 of the Procedure, the
Misconduct Officer must not confirm a penalty with the student until the University Secretary
has confirmed the outcome of their review of the case as per paragraph 61. The Misconduct
Officer will inform the Reporting Person of the outcome only and will not normally disclose
penalties unless these are directly linked to the Reporting Person.
58. If a student wishes to appeal a Stage 1 outcome, information on the process and criteria for
appeal is set out in paragraph 78 onwards.
59. It should be noted that the relevant undergraduate or postgraduate Board of Examiners may not
use its discretion to adjust marks that have been reduced for disciplinary reasons and may not
apply compensation to such marks. Board of Examiner progress and award decisions should be

10

Student Discipline Procedure: Academic Misconduct
deferred whilst a case of academic misconduct is under consideration.
60. Any penalty imposed as the result of action under this Procedure cannot be changed via the
Academic Appeals process.

STAGE 2: SENATE DISCIPLINE COMMITTEE
61. This section of the Procedure applies to cases referred to the Stage 2 Senate Discipline
Committee, following management at Stage 1.
62. All cases referred by a Misconduct Officer to Stage 2 (via the Senate Office), will be considered
by the University Secretary (or nominee). The Senate Office SharePoint site provides guidance
for Misconduct Officers and templates for submitting a case to Stage 2, including a checklist,
timeline template and Stage 1 report.
63. In cases where the University Secretary (or nominee) decides that a referral has been made
without sufficient cause, the case will be returned by the Senate Office to the Misconduct Officer
for action. In such cases, the Misconduct Officer will be responsible for following the steps set
out in paragraphs 55 to 60 above, including notifying the Reported Student of the outcome of the
allegation against them.
64. In cases where the University Secretary, (or nominee), decides that the case should be heard by
a Senate Discipline Committee for consideration, the Senate Office will organise a hearing of a
Senate Discipline Committee. In exceptional cases, the University Secretary (or nominee) may
commission an investigation to supplement the findings of the Misconduct Officer’s Stage 1
Report, in advance of a Senate Discipline Committee hearing.
65. In cases referred to a Senate Discipline Committee, the University Secretary (or nominee) will
write to the Reported Student to confirm that a Senate Discipline Committee hearing will take
place, with at least ten working days’ notice, and to confirm arrangements for the hearing. The
student will be notified of/provided with:
a. The details of the alleged offence;
b. The evidence under consideration, including any witness statements (the Reported
Student will receive the same evidence pack as a Senate Discipline Committee, barring
any briefing notes and checklists produced specifically for Senate Discipline Committee
members);
c. Information relating to penalties which may be imposed if the alleged offence is admitted
or found to be proven;
d. Their right to be accompanied (or represented in their absence) by a Supporter and/or
Representative;
e. Their right to submit evidence to a Senate Discipline Committee in advance;
f. Their right to call witnesses in support of their case;
g. The date, time and place of the hearing;
h. Confirmation of whether any Professional Advisers of the University will attend the
hearing;
i. Confirmation of the names of any witnesses that a Senate Discipline Committee will call
to the hearing;
j. A link to this Academic Misconduct Procedure.
66. If a Reported Student cannot attend the hearing, the Senate Office will request a compelling and

11

Student Discipline Procedure: Academic Misconduct
evidenced explanation as to why they cannot attend. The Reported Student will be given one
further opportunity to attend an alternative hearing. In exceptional cases, for example where a
Reported Student can evidence that they are unable attend the hearing, in person or virtually,
they may submit a written statement for consideration by a Senate Discipline Committee.
67. A Senate Discipline Committee comprises Staff and Student members of Senate known as
Senators (see Table of Roles in Annex 1). The Convener (or nominee) will ask members of a
Senate Discipline Committee to declare any perceived, potential or actual conflicts of interest
ahead of each meeting and the membership of the Committee may be amended as appropriate.
The Convener (or nominee) of the Committee will circulate the following to Committee members
in advance of the hearing:
a. The report of the Misconduct Officer, including any recommendations to a Senate
Discipline Committee;
b. The evidence gathered by the Misconduct Officer/s to support their findings, e.g. witness
statements, emails, social media posts, character references etc;
c. Any additional evidence gathered as part of an additional investigation requested by the
University Secretary (see paragraph 64);
d. A record of any previous Early Intervention/Caution cases where action was taken;
e. The report/s from any previous Stage 1 instances of Academic Misconduct or Nonacademic Misconduct, where the case was upheld;
f. Any statements or evidence submitted by the Reported Student prior to the hearing,
including any mitigation they wish to submit, for example evidence of illness or
challenging personal circumstances.
68. Any evidence which the Reported Student wishes to be considered by a Senate Discipline
Committee must be submitted to the Senate Office at least five working days before the hearing.
guidance is available online for students who are producing evidence for consideration at any
stage of this Procedure and should be utilised by Reported Students when they are preparing a
submission of evidence.
69. If the Reported Student wishes to admit the offence, with any mitigating circumstances, this may
be done in writing before the date of the hearing. The Reported Student shall still be entitled to
appear before a Senate Discipline Committee and should confirm in writing, at least five working
days ahead of the hearing, whether they will attend.
70. Each Reported Student must inform the Senate Office, at least five working days before the
hearing, of the names of any Supporter and Representative, and their relationship to them, (see
paragraph 51 above for more information on these roles), who will accompany the Reported
Student to the hearing. The Reported Student will be entitled to receive from the Senate Office a
note of the names of any Professional Advisors and/or witnesses who will be appearing on
behalf of the University. The Reported Student will have the right to suggest other witnesses that
can be contacted for a written statement or to attend the hearing. If the Reported Student fails to
provide the details of their Representative within the stated timelines, the Convener of the
Senate Discipline Committee may decide not to allow the Representative to attend the hearing.
71. If a Reported Student fails to attend a Senate Discipline Committee, the hearing will proceed in
their absence.
72. A Senate Discipline Committee may, if it is deemed necessary, adjourn a hearing for a period of

12

Student Discipline Procedure: Academic Misconduct
time. This will only occur in:
a. Exceptional cases where a Senate Discipline Committee cannot reach a decision and is
therefore required to refer the case back to the University Secretary; or
b. Cases where a Student Discipline Committee refers a student to a Fitness to Practise
panel or to student support services for wellbeing or health support; or
c. The Convener is advised by the University Secretary that criminal proceedings have
been brought to the University’s attention.
73. If a Senate Discipline Committee does not find reasonable cause for the alleged Academic
Misconduct, the case will be dismissed. The Senate Office will keep a record of the case for the
duration of the student’s registration, for reporting purposes.
74. In cases where a Senate Discipline Committee upholds the allegation of Academic Misconduct,
it is empowered to impose one or more of the following sanctions or penalties:
a. Any of the penalties set out in paragraphs 35 and 55 above, for Early
Intervention/Caution or Stage 1, respectively;
b. Reported Student is required to re-attend any part of a programme, credit-bearing or
non-credit-bearing;
c. Reported Student is penalised by the loss of the opportunity to resit or resubmit
assessment/s;
d. Reported Student suspended from attendance at the University for a stipulated period;
e. Reported Student is suspended from access to named University Services or facilities for
a stipulated period;
f. Reported Student is permanently excluded from access to named University Services or
facilities;
g. Reported Student’s degree classification will be capped;
h. Reported Student is awarded an exit award rather than the degree for which they
registered;
i. An award or credits for which the Reported Student could be eligible is withheld
permanently or for a specified period of time;
j. An award previously granted by the University of Strathclyde is revoked, either
permanently or for a specified period of time, under Statute 3.6.3;
k. Reported Student is suspended from the University for a specified period of time;
l. Reported Student is permanently excluded from the University of Strathclyde without
credits or awards gained;
m. Reported Student is permanently excluded from the University of Strathclyde with credits
or awards gained;
n. Such other penalties as may be proportionate to the offence committed by the Reported
Student and considered appropriate by a Senate Discipline Committee.1
1

Under Constitutional Regulation 1.5.5. Senate delegates its powers to a Senate Discipline Committee, which is empowered to use its
judgement to consider individual discipline cases in accordance with the provision of Regulations for Student Discipline and determine
proportionate penalties. These may include a hybrid of the penalties listed in paragraph 74, including variations on these penalties, or
other penalties not listed above or anywhere else within this Procedure. Senate empowers a Senate Discipline Committee to exercise its
judgement in such cases.

75. Any of the above penalties may be suspended for a period of time for the following reasons:
a. Reported Student is appealing the decision of a Senate Discipline Committee;
b. A Senate Discipline Committee has specified conditions, in agreement with the
13

Student Discipline Procedure: Academic Misconduct
University Secretary (or nominee), for example, that the University awaits a student’s
participation in a Fitness to Practise panel, the outcomes of which might affect the
penalty applied.
76. The University Secretary (or nominee) will write to the Reported Student to confirm the outcome
of the case and the implementation of any penalties.
77. The Senate Office will inform the Reporting Person, who made the allegation, of the outcome
only and will not normally disclose penalties unless these are directly linked to the Reporting
Person.

RIGHT TO APPEAL
78. Following a Reported Student’s receipt of confirmation that an Academic Misconduct case has
been upheld and details of any penalty being applied, either from the Misconduct Officer (for
Stage 1) or a Senate Discipline Committee (for Stage 2), the Reported Student may decide to
appeal the decision.
79. A decision made by a Misconduct Officer to refer a case to the University Secretary for
consideration under Stage 2 of the Procedure does not constitute a penalty, and at this stage a
Reported Student is unable to appeal. If the University Secretary considers that a case should
not progress to a Senate Discipline Committee hearing the case will be returned to the relevant
Department for disposal under Stage 1 of the Procedure and the application of an appropriate
penalty. At this stage the Misconduct Officer will write to the Reported Student to inform them of
the outcome of the Stage 1 disciplinary process and their right to appeal.
80. As stated in paragraph 39, if a Reported Student does not accept recommendations put in place
as part of Early Intervention/Caution, their case will automatically progress to Stage 1.
81. A Reported Student wishing to submit an appeal against the outcome of a Stage 1 case must
do so within 10 working days of receipt of written confirmation of the outcome of the case from
the Misconduct Officer.
82. A Reported Student wishing to submit an appeal against an outcome of a Stage 2 case must
submit this within 10 working days of receipt of written confirmation from the University
Secretary of the outcome of the case from a Senate Discipline Committee.
83. A Reported Student has the right to submit an appeal on one or more of the following criteria
against a decision made, or the penalty imposed, in both Stage 1 and Stage 2 cases:
a. New material evidence is available, which was not available on reasonable enquiry or
application at the time of consideration at Stage 1 or Stage 2;
b. A procedural irregularity occurred during the process;
c. Bias or prejudice against the Reported Student was demonstrated by the Misconduct
Officer and/or a Senate Discipline Committee;
d. The penalty imposed is excessive or represents inappropriate punishment.
84. When submitting an appeal, the Reported Student will need to provide new evidence to
demonstrate sufficient grounds for appeal against the criteria listed in paragraph 83. This may
take the form of email correspondence, the notes of a Senate Discipline Committee, outcome

14

Student Discipline Procedure: Academic Misconduct
letters or other documentary evidence. It is unlikely that an appeal will be heard if the relevant
and new evidence and/or a compelling commentary is not provided to demonstrate there are
sufficient grounds for appeal.

Appeals Against Stage 1 Outcomes
85. Appeals against Stage 1 outcomes will be submitted to the Executive Dean of the Faculty (or
nominee). The Reported Student must complete the Discipline Procedure Appeals Form and
clearly set out the above criteria for appeal, confirming which of the above categories in
paragraph 83 form the basis of the appeal. Any supporting evidence must be submitted to the
Executive Dean of Faculty, along with the Discipline Procedure Appeals Form.
86. The Executive Dean (or nominee) will consider whether there are sufficient grounds to hear the
appeal. If the appeal is determined to be admissible, the Executive Dean (or nominee) will
recommend to the University Secretary that the case progresses to a Senate Discipline
Committee under Stage 2 of this Procedure.
87. If the University Secretary decides that the case should be considered by a Senate Discipline
Committee, Stage 2 will be instigated (see paragraphs 61 to 77 above). In such cases, the
University Secretary will write to the student after the Executive Dean has confirmed the
outcome of the appeal.
88. If the Executive Dean (or nominee) determines that there are insufficient grounds for appeal
against a Stage 1 outcome, the case will be dismissed and there is no further right of appeal. In
such cases, the Executive Dean (or nominee) will confirm the outcome of the Stage 1 appeal to
the Reported Student within 30 working days of receipt.

Appeals Against Stage 2 Outcomes
89. Appeals against Stage 2 Senate Discipline Committee outcomes will be submitted to the Senate
Office, using the Discipline Procedure Appeals Form. The Reported Student must clearly set out
the criteria for appeal (see paragraph 83 above), and will need to provide new evidence to
demonstrate sufficient grounds for appeal against these criteria. It is unlikely that an appeal will
be heard if the relevant and new evidence and/or a compelling commentary is not provided to
demonstrate there are sufficient grounds for appeal.
90. Any evidence submitted to support an appeal must be submitted to the Senate Office along with
the Discipline Procedure Appeals Form. Guidance for students on producing evidence for
consideration at any stage of this Procedure is available online and should be utilised by
Reported Students when they are preparing an appeal submission.
91. The Senate Office will confirm receipt of the appeal to the Reported Student, usually within five
working days.
92. The Vice-Principal (or nominee) will convene a Panel to discuss the appeal, comprising
themselves, a Senate Discipline Appeals Board Convener and the Director of Education
Enhancement (or nominee). This Panel will reach a decision as to whether there are sufficient
grounds for the appeal to be heard by a Senate Discipline Appeals Board. A Professional
Advisor of the University may also be in attendance to provide advice and guidance.
93. If the Panel decide that there are insufficient grounds for appeal, the Vice Principal (or nominee)
will write to the Reported Student, within 30 working days of receipt of the appeal, to inform
15

Student Discipline Procedure: Academic Misconduct
them of this decision. This letter will reconfirm the original outcomes and any penalties assigned
at Stage 2. There is no further right of appeal.
94. If the Panel determines there are sufficient grounds for appeal, the Vice-Principal will refer the
case to a Senate Discipline Appeals Board. The Vice-Principal (or nominee) will write to the
student, within 30 working days of receipt of the appeal, to inform the student that a Senate
Discipline Appeals Board will hear their appeal.
95. A Senate Discipline Appeals Board will not comprise Senators who were on the original Senate
Discipline Committee. The Convener (or nominee) will ask Senators forming the Senate
Discipline Board to declare any perceived or actual conflicts of interest ahead of each meeting
and the membership of the Board may be amended as appropriate.
96. If a Stage 2 Senate Discipline Committee has previously imposed a penalty of partial or full
suspension or expulsion, the student will not normally be permitted to attend the University
during the period when the appeal case is being investigated and heard. The Reported Student
may apply to the Vice-Principal for permission to attend the University if it would be
unreasonable to prevent attendance. Reasons for such an application for permission may
include, but are not limited to:
a.
b.
c.
d.

Undertaking a formal on campus assessment for their programme of study;
A change in circumstances since the Stage 2 Senate Discipline Committee;
A delay in the appeal hearing not linked to further investigation of a case;
The timing of an appeal, for example if the timing of a Senate Discipline Appeals Board
means that a Reported Student successfully appealing the original penalty would be
prevented from returning to study immediately.

97. Applications for a Reported Student to attend the University in the circumstances outlined in
paragraph 96 above, must be submitted to the Senate Office in writing. On review of a
recommendation from the Vice-Principal (or nominee), the Principal (or nominee) may refuse or
grant permission to attend the University and may, if granting permission to attend, limit
attendance to specific locations and/or times. The Senate Office will communicate this decision
to the Reported Student.
98. A Senate Discipline Appeals Board hearing will follow the same format as that outlined for a
Senate Discipline Committee hearing in paragraphs 65 to 77.
99. A Senate Discipline Appeals Board may, if it is deemed necessary, adjourn a hearing for a
period of time. This will only occur in:
a.

b.
c.

100.

Exceptional cases where a Senate Discipline Appeals Board cannot reach a decision
and is therefore required to refer the case back to the Vice Principal, who may decide to
refer the case back to the University Secretary with a recommendation that further
investigations are undertaken; or
Cases where a Senate Discipline Appeals Board refers a student to a Fitness to Practise
panel or to student support services for wellbeing or health support; or
The Convener is advised by the University Secretary that criminal proceedings have
been brought to the University’s attention.
If the Reported Student’s appeal is upheld, the Reported Student will receive written

16

Student Discipline Procedure: Academic Misconduct
confirmation from the Vice Principal (or nominee) that all penalties are either withdrawn, (if
Academic Misconduct is determined not to have occurred), or reduced. Any reduced penalties
will be in line with those outlined under paragraph 74 of this Procedure.
101.
If a Senate Discipline Appeals Board dismisses the appeal, the Vice-Principal (or
nominee) will confirm to the Reported Student, in writing, that the original outcome and penalties
from Stage 2 stand.
102.
The Reported Student will normally be formally informed of the outcome of the hearing
within five working days of the hearing.
103.
Students can contact the Scottish Public Services Ombudsman for advice, should they
wish to make a complaint to the Ombudsman regarding a Non-academic Misconduct case and
outcome, in line with sections 3 and 4 of the Complaints Handling Procedure.
104.
Senate receives regular reports of cases heard by Senate Discipline Committees and
Senate Discipline Appeals Boards. These are anonymised in nature and noted under the
Reserved Agenda of Senate.

17

Student Discipline Procedure: Academic Misconduct

ANNEX 1 - ROLES
Roles and Responsibilities relating to Student Discipline
Principal

Under Statue 5.2 the Principal is responsible for maintaining and
promoting the efficiency and good order of the University.
The Principal chairs the University Senate.

Vice-Principal

University Secretary

Associate Principal &
Executive Deans
Deputy Associate
Principals
Misconduct Officer
(usually an academic
member of staff)

Professional Advisor

Representative

Under Ordinance 1.3.1 the Principal may refuse to admit any person
as a member or student of the University, and may suspend any
student from any class or classes, and may exclude any member or
student or other individual(s) from any part of the University or its
precincts for reasons including but not limited to unreasonable, amoral
or illegal conduct.
During the absence of the Principal the Vice-Principal undertakes the
duties of the Principal.
The Vice-Principal has a specific decision-making role under the
Student Discipline Procedures.
The responsibilities of the University Secretary include the provision of
support services for Senate, and, through the Senate Office, for
overseeing University-level discipline cases, and, through the
Directorate of Strategy & Planning, for overseeing University-level
complaints handling.
The University Secretary has a specific decision-making role under
the Student Discipline Procedures.
Associate Principal & Executive Deans may be invited by the VicePrincipal to convene Senate Discipline Appeals Board.
Deputy Associate Principals may be invited by the University
Secretary to convene Senate Discipline Committees or by the VicePrincipal to convene Senate Discipline Appeals Boards.
Appointed by the Head of Department to consider allegations of
Academic Misconduct.
Under the Student Discipline Procedures, the Misconduct Officer is
empowered to impose penalties on behalf of Senate following a Stage
1 investigation, or to recommend to the University Secretary that a
case is heard by a Senate Discipline Committee.
A Professional Advisor, to include where appropriate internal or
external legal counsel, who is invited to attend a Senate Discipline
Committee or a Senate Discipline Appeals Board hearing to provide
professional advice.
Person chosen by the Reported Student to offer advice or to represent
them in interviews with Misconduct Officers, and/or at Senate
Discipline Committee/Senate Discipline Appeals Board hearings.
Subject to prior consent of the Convener, more than one
Representative may accompany the student to a Senate Discipline

18

Student Discipline Procedure: Academic Misconduct

Senate Discipline
Appeals Board

Senate Discipline
Appeals Board
Convener
Senate Discipline
Committee

Senate Discipline
Committee Convener
Senator

Senate Office

Supporter

Committee or Senate Discipline Appeals Board. See paragraph 51 for
further details.
A Sub-Committee of Senate established to consider student appeals
against decisions of the Senate Discipline Committee regarding
disciplinary offences (constitutional regulation 1.5.6). Membership
comprises both Staff Senators and Student Senators. The Senate
Discipline Appeals Board is empowered to ratify or rescind penalties
assigned at Stage 2 by the Senate Discipline Committee.
An Associate Principal or Deputy Associate Principal invited by the
Vice-Principal to convene a Senate Discipline Appeals Board.
A Sub-Committee of Senate that convenes to hear and decide on the
outcome of individual disciplinary cases in accordance with the
provisions of the Regulations for Student Discipline (constitutional
regulations 1.5.4 & 1.5.5). Senate Discipline Committees may also
make recommendations on policy to Senate. Membership comprises
Staff Senators and Student Senators.
A Deputy Associate Principal invited by the University Secretary to
convene a Senate Discipline Committee
Members of Senate who are appointed to hear Stage 2 cases at
Senate Discipline Committees and to hear appeals at Senate
Discipline Appeals Boards. Members collectively make decisions on
the outcome of Stage 2 and on appeal cases on behalf of Senate.
Professional Services Office in the Directorate of Education
Enhancement that provides expert advice and administrative support
for the Student Discipline Procedures, and additionally supports the
University Senate, the Principal and the Vice-Principal.
Person chosen by the Reported Student to accompany them to
interviews with Misconduct Officers; and/or to Senate Discipline
Committee/Senate Discipline Appeals Board hearings. The Supporter
has no formal role in the Procedure beyond support for the Reported
Student accused of Academic Misconduct. See paragraph 51 for
further details.

19

Student Discipline Procedure: Academic Misconduct

ANNEX 2 – DEFINITIONS
Terms used within this Procedure
Term
Academic Misconduct

Department
Host Institution

Non-Academic Misconduct
Regulation(s)

Reporting Person

Reported Student
Strath Union

Meaning
Any action or attempted action that may result in creating
an unfair academic advantage for a student, or an unfair
academic advantage or disadvantage for any other
student member/s of the academic community and as
further defined in the University’s Student Discipline
Procedure for Academic Misconduct.
Academic department, faculty, directorate or
service within a directorate.
The university or organisation at which a Reported
Student is primarily registered, for example for example a
home university for a student on exchange.
Violation of the University’s Regulations though behaviour
which is not defined as Academic Misconduct.
Charter, statutes, ordinances, constitutional regulations,
academic regulations, policies, procedures, codes of
practice, codes of conduct, guidance documents and any
other University documents which include within them
details of the regulation of Academic Misconduct
behaviours of students of the University.
A student, staff member, Strath Union representative,
recognised University visitor (such as an external
examiner), external professional body representative or a
member of the public.
Student against whom an allegation of Academic
Misconduct has been made.
The trading name of the University of Strathclyde’s
Students’ Association.

20

Student Discipline Procedure: Academic Misconduct

ANNEX 3 – EXAMPLES OF ACADEMIC MISCONDUCT
As noted in paragraph 29 of the Student Discipline Procedure: Academic Misconduct, the
following examples of academic misconduct do not comprise an exhaustive list and the
University may instigate investigations into other types of academic misconduct as they arise.
The information below is also included within the University’s Guidance on Maintaining
Academic Integrity.
A. Plagiarism (including poor academic practice around referencing and
acknowledging sources)
Plagiarism is the use, without acknowledgement, of the intellectual work of other people,
and the act of representing the ideas or discoveries of others as your own in submitted
assessments and publications. The use of other people’s research, written works, or
phrasing without proper acknowledgement is considered to be plagiarism, whether or not a
student has intended this.
The unattributed use of internet sources and documents is plagiarism. At all times
students should ensure that they are using credible sources for their work and these are
acknowledged appropriately, taking particular care when using material sourced from the
internet. Plagiarism may also include circumstances where minor amendments are made
to disguise the original source, or to pass off an idea as a student’s own, including the use
of any software or artificial intelligence to generate create or revise work, simply because
the way that idea is expressed has been changed. A common excuse for plagiarism of this
type is not having enough time to complete the work. It is important to note that tight
deadlines will not be considered a reasonable defence against plagiarism. The University’s
Policy and Procedure on Extensions to Coursework Submission confirms arrangements
for requesting extensions to deadlines.
Improper or incomplete referencing is plagiarism. If text is copied directly from another
source, it should be placed in quotation marks or another suitable identifier. All other
source material should be accompanied by clear references in the text where the material
is utilised. Library Services staff and academic staff can advise students on how to
reference properly for each academic discipline.
B. Duplication of submitted work (including self-plagiarism)
This is the submission, in whole or in part, of your own work that has previously been
submitted for a different assignment (either at the University of Strathclyde or elsewhere).
Whilst it is acceptable for a student to make brief reference to their own studies and
findings, it is unacceptable to resubmit material that has already been assessed, unless
this has been expressly permitted.
C. Working in ways or obtaining information not permitted by the terms of the
assessment or cheating in any assessment (including procuring, purchasing and
submitting the work of a third-party)
Examples of cheating include, but are not limited to:

21

i.
ii.
iii.
iv.
v.
vi.
vii.
viii.

Having access or attempting to gain access, during a formal examination or class test,
to any unauthorised material, electronic device or calculator;
Copying from another student;
Aiding, or attempting to aid, another student;
Communicating, or attempting to communicate, with anyone other than an official
invigilator during a formal examination;
Allowing another person to impersonate a candidate in a formal examination;
Colluding with other students or individuals to formulate answers to timed, online
examinations;
Purchasing assessments from ‘essay mill’ providers;
Other behaviours that may give an unfair academic advantage, including the
unauthorised use of Generative Artificial Intelligence tools and services.

Students may be made aware of other prohibited behaviours, activities, and actions in module
and/or programme handbooks and during teaching and learning activities.
D. Collusion (including working or communicating with others to complete an individual
assessment, knowingly allowing work to be copied in any way, and/or providing work to
a third party with the intention of facilitating plagiarism)
Collusion includes circumstances where two or more candidates work or plan jointly to cheat in
any of the above ways. Collusion also involves working with others on tasks that should be
carried out on an individual basis. Unless advised otherwise, any work which is submitted for
assessment must be produced by individual students. Uploading or in any way sharing or
distributing learning, teaching or assessment materials via online platforms with the intention of
facilitating plagiarism or any other form of cheating may also be considered a form of collusion.
There is a difference between collaboration and collusion. Students are advised by academic
staff when and how they may collaborate with other students (especially in group assignments
or projects, where students will often work with others to collect data, prepare reports and
presentations and discuss their work). Generally, it is considered helpful and appropriate for
students to collaborate, through discussing topics and rehearsing various arguments and
propositions, but any formal assessment of students as an individual should be produced
independently and submitted as their own work.
E. Fabrication or deliberate misrepresentation of information
This includes either changing any information (e.g. data) to support a hypothesis, or inventing
information (e.g. experimental results, interview questions or answers, survey results), which
are then reported as genuine observations or measurements. Fabricating references or
deliberately misrepresenting the words, experiences, or ideas of others may also be considered
academic misconduct under this heading.
F. False candidature or impersonation
This involves any means where a student submits work for any assessment which has
been produced – in part or in full - by someone else (e.g. another student, someone from
outside the University, internet “cheat sites” or “essay mills”). It is considered reasonable
for students to allow others to proof-read their work, but this should be limited to
comments on spelling and grammar. Proof-readers should not be used to re-write or
restructure a student’s work.

Writing an assignment or completing an examination on behalf of another student is also a
form of academic misconduct, as is impersonating another student.
G. False declarations
Making a false declaration in order to receive special consideration by an Examination
Board/Committee or Appeals Committee or to obtain extensions to deadlines or exemption
from work.
H. Offering or accepting any kind of bribe or threatening or coercing others in relation
to assessments at and/or in association with the University
This includes offering or accepting a bribe of any kind in relation to any activity at or in
association with the University, and the theft of another student’s work, or the work of
another individual external to the University. These are viewed as very serious offences. If
a student is found to have exerted pressure on other students through harassment, slander
or bullying, or to have knowingly participated in bribery, they will be subject to an additional
disciplinary investigation via the Student Discipline Procedure: Non-Academic Misconduct.
I.

Research misconduct, including behaviours or actions that fall short of the
standards of ethics, research and scholarship required to ensure that the integrity
of research is upheld
Please see the University’s Research Code of Practice for a detailed list of examples of
research misconduct.

Lead Author
Senate Office

Contributing Authors
Quality Enhancement and Assurance Team

Committee Route
Senate
Education Strategy Committee
Quality Assurance Committee

Contact Team

Senate Office

Contact Email

senate-discipline@strath.ac.uk
