Policy No: QPOLAcI
Version: 1.2
Date of Issue: 29 May 2026

Academic Integrity Policy
1.

Context
Trinity College Dublin, the University of Dublin, hereafter referred to as Trinity, is
committed to upholding academic integrity, and recognises that it underpins
all aspects of university life, including all activities relating to research,
learning, assessment, and scholarship.
Trinity therefore considers academic misconduct to be serious and academically
fraudulent and an offence against academic integrity, as approved by Council in
the Statement on Academic Integrity (2022). Academic misconduct is subject to
the Trinity Procedures in Cases of Suspected Misconduct
This policy should be read in conjunction with (and is subject to) the University
Calendar Parts II and Part III (with respect to Academic Integrity and the use of Gen
AI), and the Trinity College Statement on Artificial Intelligence and Generative AI in
Teaching, Learning, Assessment and Research.

2.

Purpose

3.

Benefits

3.2

It supports and fosters academic integrity across the undergraduate and
postgraduate student body.

3.3

It supports staff in upholding academic integrity by providing a robust framework
for addressing academic misconduct.

4.

Scope

3.1

The policy provides a coherent approach to inform and educate students and
staff about upholding academic integrity (including the inappropriate use of
GenAI) and avoiding academic misconduct.
The policy contributes to a shared understanding for staff and students of what
constitutes academic integrity, academic misconduct and the inappropriate use of
Gen AI.

This policy applies to all staff, and to undergraduate and postgraduate students at
Trinity.
1

Policy No: QPOLAcI
Version: 1.2
Date of Issue: 29 May 2026

5.

Principles
•

•

•

Staff and students of Trinity College Dublin must commit themselves to
acting responsibly and ethically, embracing integrity in all actions and interactions
as members of the College community, in keeping with the Council
approved Statement on Academic Integrity (2022).
Staff and students of Trinity College Dublin, when using AI and GenAI, must do so in
ways that are appropriate, transparent, responsible and prioritise ethical
considerations, and that ensure that academic integrity is maintained in the usage
of AI and GenAI, as articulated in the Trinity College Statement on Artificial
Intelligence and Generative AI in Teaching, Learning, Assessment and Research.
Trinity commits to providing ongoing resources and guidance to support students
and staff in the responsible and ethical use of AI and GenAI.

6.

Definitions

7.

Policy

7.1

All staff and students must uphold the principles of academic integrity (including
the appropriate use of GenAI) and adhere to the regulations as outlined by the
University.
All staff and students must inform themselves about academic integrity and the
General Regulations that pertain to academic integrity (including the appropriate
use of GenAI), which can be found in the University Calendar, Parts II and III.
Programme handbooks must contain Trinity’s specified section on academic integrity
in accordance with the Programme Handbook Core Content document. Programme
handbooks must also clearly outline and communicate the permitted use of GenAI by
students in learning activities and assessment tasks (see recommended standard text
in the Programme Handbook Templates). If individual modules have further
restrictions or permit greater allowances in the use of GenAI, those restrictions or
allowances must be stated in the module descriptions in the Blackboard VLE. In such
circumstances, it is the module permissions regarding the use of GenAI which are
deemed to be definitive for use in that module.
Levels of academic misconduct are defined within the regulations and different
consequences are applied according to the level. The levels and consequences can
be found at on the Academic Affairs website.

7.2

7.3

7.4

All definitions relating to academic integrity and academic misconduct are listed in
the Curriculum Glossary.

2

Policy No: QPOLAcI
Version: 1.2
Date of Issue: 29 May 2026

7.5
7.6

7.7

7.8

7.9

7.10

Students must read and understand the Library Guide on Academic Integrity and
complete the Ready, Steady, Write plagiarism tutorial, as specified by Trinity.
Students should familiarise themselves with the Library Guide on Generative AI,
which outlines considerations for using and acknowledging the use of Gen AI in
academic work.
All students must complete a signed declaration to be submitted with all assessed
coursework, declaring that they have read and understood the Library guide on
Academic Integrity and Generative AI, and completed the online tutorial, and that
the assignment/coursework submitted by them is their own work. See
https://libguides.tcd.ie/academic-integrity/declaration.
All students submitting a research dissertation or thesis for examination must
include a signed declaration with it, declaring that the work is entirely their own
and that it has been completed in compliance with relevant University policies
such as the Trinity Policy on Good Research Practice and the College Statement on
AI and GenAI in Teaching, Learning, Assessment and Research. See Guidelines for
Submission of Theses and Dissertations and the Calendar Part III.
All breaches of academic integrity must be recorded on SITS, guidance on which
can be found at https://www.tcd.ie/media/tcd/academic-affairs/pdfs/academicintegrity/decision-recording-in-SITS-guide.pdf.
Records relating to academic misconduct will be retained in accordance with the
Trinity Records Management Policy and Trinity Data Protection Policy and in
compliance with data protection law, specifically the EU General Data Protection
Regulation 2016 (“GDPR”) and the Data Protection Acts 1988-2018.

8.

Responsibility

8.1

The responsibility for this policy lies with the Senior Lecturer/Dean of
Undergraduate Studies and the Dean of Graduate Studies.

9.

Related Documents

9.1
9.2

The University Calendar, Parts II and III
Trinity College Statement on Artificial Intelligence and Generative AI in Teaching,
Learning, Assessment and Research.
College Statement on Integrity (2022)
Living Guidelines on the Responsible Use of Generative AI in Research.
Curriculum Glossary
Procedures in cases of suspected academic misconduct
Library Guide on Academic Integrity
Library Guide on Generative AI

9.3
9.4
9.5
9.6
9.7
9.8

3

Policy No: QPOLAcI
Version: 1.2
Date of Issue: 29 May 2026

9.9
9.10
9.11

Policy on Good Research Practice
Programme Handbook Policy
Data Protection

10.

Document Control

10.1

Approved by: University Council

10.2

Date of initial approval: 5 June 2024

10.3

Date revised policy approved: 27 May 2026

10.4

Date revised policy effective from: 27 May 2026

10.5

Date of next review: Academic Year 2028/29

4
