Student guidance on Artificial Intelligence in Learning and Teaching
AY23-24
HW General principles
1. Students should use HW supported technology as this has been reviewed to ensure that it
protects their privacy, is cyber secure and is safe to use.
2. Students should think critically about any choice to use technology.
3. Students must be confident that they have made informed decisions about using
technology, and that it is in keeping with academic integrity.
4. HW will support students to develop the digital capabilities needed to participate effectively
in the university and wider society.

Artificial intelligence
Heriot-Watt University recognises the opportunities and challenges that developments in artificial
intelligence (AI), in particular generative AI, offer to learning, teaching and assessment. We will
encourage and support students and staff to engage with artificial intelligence in keeping with the
HW general principles on use of technology.
How AI may be used at HW
1. Use of generative artificial intelligence (GAI) is permitted provided that such use is clearly
identified and referenced. Generative AI spelling and grammar checking (e.g. MS Word,
Grammarly) does not need to be referenced unless specifically indicated within the course.
2. The use of generative AI should be referenced using the appropriate referencing format for
the piece of work.
3. Any use of artificial intelligence must align with the principles of academic integrity as
outlined by the International Centre for Academic Integrity.
4. Courses and programmes within HW may make use of generative AI where it is appropriate
to support the learning outcomes, however there is no requirement for a course or
programme to utilise generative AI.
5. If generative AI is to be used, course staff will provide clear guidance to students on how
and when generative AI may be used within the course. Any use of generative AI within a
course will be in keeping with HW general principles on use of technology. HW will keep
under review developments on generative AI detection tools.
6. HW will not be utilising any generative AI detection tools for the period of AY23-24.
However the existing measures to identify and address academic misconduct are still in use
and will apply to any misuse of generative artificial intelligence.
7. HW will also ensure that staff have the appropriate digital capabilities and the appropriate
technologies to provide effective teaching, learning and assessment. This will support

students to develop the appropriate digital capabilities to enable them to enter society with
the attributes to thrive in this technology-enabled era.

How to choose whether to use generative AI
1. If you are thinking about using generative AI (GAI) to support your learning check whether
its use is permitted on your course. Only use GAI if it is permitted on your course and only
use if for the purposes it is permitted e.g. you might be permitted to use it to research a
topic but not to help you write it up. Remember that whether it is permitted or not may be
different on each course and will be different from other institutions in which you have
studied.
2. If use of generative AI is permitted on your course, then consider carefully which technology
is most appropriate to use. Different technologies have different intended purposes e.g.
media generation, text generation, conversational Q&A.
3. If it is a requirement of your course, and you have concerns about using AI, you should raise
this with your course leader clearly explaining your concerns. The HW general principles of
use of technology may help you with this decision.

How to write a generative AI prompt
The ‘prompt’ provides the instruction to the generative AI of what you want it to do. It is therefore
important that your prompt is as specific and clear as possible. As with any technology, if you
provide unclear or poor instructions you will get unclear and poor results.
It is not good practice to use the whole assessment question or brief as a prompt. It is better to
break down the question into the key aspects that you need to focus on and tailor your prompts to
these.
When writing the prompt be specific about the parameters to be considered and the output you
require. Using terms such as ‘and’, ‘or’ and ‘not’ can be useful to ensure information is included or
excluded as required.
In the example below you can see how refining the prompt can provide more specific and useful
output.
•
•
•
•

What is the impact of climate change?
What is the impact of climate change in my country?
What is the impact of climate change in my country on farming?
Write an essay plan for a critical evaluation of the impact of climate change in my country
on food production by farmers.

Think carefully about the type of output you require. For example, do you need a research plan, an
essay plan, some ideas about the topic, a review or sense check of your current understanding etc.

Caution: Using artificial intelligence to complete a whole assignment for you would
not be acting with academic integrity, as you would be presenting work that Page
is not2 of 4
your own. This is plagiarism and would be considered academic misconduct.

Top tips:
1. As you develop your prompts, reflect on what changes you are making to them and how this
is helping you to refine your understanding of the topic.
2. Keep copies of your prompts and outputs for future reference. You may need to provide
copies of them in your assignments.
3. Use generative AI that identifies where information is sourced from so that you can check
that it has used a real source, them make sure that you do check the source and make your
own assessment as to whether the source is appropriate and reliable.

How to interpret the output from generative AI
There are key factors to bear in mind when using output from generative AI:
1. Critically evaluate the content and cross-check it with trusted academic sources. (You can
get help with critical evaluation from the Skills Hub).
2. AI generated content may not be accurate (even where it includes references), the outputs
are predictions, they are not facts, and the content may be based on biased or stereotypical
perspectives.
3. Double check the accuracy of the content and the references using trusted academic
sources e.g. via the University Library to access peer-reviewed journals.
4. As you cross-check the content, look for sources that are Accurate, Current, Objective,
Relevant and Named. (Find out more about this ACORN approach from Cite Them Right
Online).
5. The output may draw on copyright information as generative AI operates by scraping
information from the internet without checking the owners’ permission. Copying this output
may be a breach of copyright, so try to identify and use the original source, ensuring you
comply with copyright as you do so.

How you use the output from generative AI
How you use the output will depend on what is permitted within your course, check with your
course leader to find out what is permitted. Note that what is permitted may be different for
different courses.

Key point
You must ensure that you act with academic integrity at all times. Academic
integrity is the umbrella term used to describe 6 fundamental values of academia honesty, fairness, responsibility, trust, respect and courage.

Page 3 of 4

It may be that the output is formative only, helping you to develop and refine your thinking. If this
is the case, check your course guidance or speak to your course team on whether you need to
reference this use.
Where the output contributes to summative assessment, you must ensure that you reference this
following the referencing style and any specific guidance from your course.

Top tip:
If you are using generative AI, take very careful notes of any prompts and outputs so that you can
clearly identify what work was generated by AI and you do not unintentionally plagiarise by
presenting AI generated work as if it were your own.

Referencing your use of AI
Different referencing styles take different approaches to how generative AI should be referenced.
You should ensure that you follow the guidance for the referencing style used on your course.
You can find guidance and examples of how to reference AI in many standard referencing styles via
Cite Them Right Online. If you cannot find guidance there you should consult the library and your
Course Leader.
You should check whether your course requires you to provide copies of the prompts you used or
the output generated by the AI.

Summary
•
•
•

Use of generative artificial intelligence (GAI) is permitted provided that such use is clearly
identified and referenced.
You should check with your course leader what is permitted on your course and what
guidance they have on how it might be used and should be referenced.
You must act with academic integrity at all times.

Resources
Student Skills Hub
HW Academic Integrity website (public-facing)
HW Academic Integrity hub (students and staff only)
HW Student Academic Conduct policy
HW guidance on plagiarism

Page 4 of 4
