Approved ICR policy

Assessment Misconduct
Procedure
Approving committee:

Academic Board

Minute reference:

A/6/00/10

Document owner:

Academic Services - Education Policy and Quality

Key Contact(s):

Stuart Bell; Yvonne Corcoran

Date of Equality Impact Assessment:

10/01/2020

Equality Impact Assessment Outcome: No impact
Latest review date:

21/07/2025

Next review date:

31/07/2029

1. Introduction
1.1. Purpose and context
1.1.1. This document, formerly known as the Code of Practice for Plagiarism and Examination
Offences, sets out the procedure for investigating and resolving suspected cases of assessment
misconduct, including inappropriate use of generative artificial intelligence (generative AI).
1.1.2. For other student misconduct, the Student Disciplinary Procedure should instead be followed.

1.2. Scope
This procedure applies to all students registered on any of the ICR's taught courses and research
degrees.

1.3. Roles and responsibilities
1.3.1. Where suspicions of assessment misconduct occur, these will usually be identified by examiners.
1.3.2. Such allegations will then be considered by the appropriate Deputy Dean or Course Director.
1.3.3. Sustained allegations will be escalated to the Academic Registrar, who may either take action
(where the case is clear-cut) or may escalate the case further to the Academic Dean and/or a Hearing
Committee.
1.3.4. The administration of formal investigations will be supported by a Case Handler, who will be a
member of staff appointed by the Academic Registrar.
1.3.5. Alternative members of staff may be nominated by the Academic Registrar (or, in their absence,
the Chief Research & Academic Officer) to take on any of the roles detailed in this procedure. This action
Printed on 31 July 2025 from https://nexus.icr.ac.uk/Lists/ICR%20Policies/DispForm.aspx?ID=539
Uncontrolled if printed

Approved ICR policy

will typically be taken if those named have had any previous involvement in the matter, or could
reasonably be perceived by the student to be biased, or are unavailable at the time of the investigation.
1.3.6. Consideration of the individuals who will undertake roles at each stage should be considered at
the start of the process, to ensure appropriate members of staff will be available to cover later stages.

1.4. Definitions and glossary
1.4.1. Assessment misconduct is any action or attempted action that may result in a student obtaining
an unfair academic advantage in relation to an assessment. This includes but is not limited to plagiarism,
unauthorised collaboration and the possession of unauthorised materials during an assessment.
1.4.2. The following are examples of assessment misconduct, although this list is not exhaustive. In all
cases, references to another person shall be deemed to include a digital tool such as generative AI
unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
o
o
o
o
o
o

o

o
o
o
o
o
o
o

Plagiarism: direct copying of another person’s work without proper acknowledgement; or
claiming another person’s ideas as the student’s own.
Conspiring to have work completed by another person.
Helping another person to cheat, by offering work for them to use as their own.
Colluding with others such that assessed work is the result of more than one person’s
work without properly acknowledging the contribution of others.
Not disclosing third-party contributions to assessed work.
Research misconduct in relation to original research-based assessment (taught course
dissertation, research degree thesis): including plagiarism, fabrication of data, falsifying
the results of laboratory, field work or other forms of data collection and analysis. See
paragraph 3.4.
Making false statements or presenting false evidence, in support of an application for
extenuating circumstances, obtaining an assessment extension or in explanation of any
form of absence or default.
Impersonation of another during an examination or other assessment related event.
Failure to observe the regulations or instructions for an examination.
Conduct affecting the security of an examination, including breach of confidentiality e.g.
prior disclosure of questions for an unseen examination.
Possessing and/or using prohibited materials in an examination room.
Conferring with others in an examination room.
Leaving an examination room without permission or supervision and returning to the
examination room.
Removing a script or other examination stationery from an examination room.

2. General principles
2.1. The ICR aims to process any case of suspected academic conduct within 90 calendar days from
the date of the initial letter confirming the allegation to the student. There will occasionally be
circumstances when, for good reasons, the ICR will need to extend the timeframe for this process, or
part of the process, and in these circumstances the parties involved will be notified and kept updated as
to the progress of the case.
2.2. At the earliest opportunity, students should be made aware of the sources of support available.
These can be found in the relevant Student Handbooks, available on the intranet (for research degree
students) or the virtual learning environment (for taught courses students).
2.3. All parties are expected to act reasonably and fairly towards each other, and to treat the processes
themselves with respect. This applies in relation to all correspondence and when attending formal
Printed on 31 July 2025 from https://nexus.icr.ac.uk/Lists/ICR%20Policies/DispForm.aspx?ID=539
Uncontrolled if printed

Approved ICR policy

hearings. Not adhering to this requirement may make the current allegation of misconduct more serious
or it could be the subject of an additional allegation of misconduct.
2.4. Reasonable adjustments will be made to this procedure to enable students with disabilities to
engage with equal opportunity.
2.5. Appropriate and proportionate written records will be kept by the Case Handler throughout the
process and stored confidentially in accordance with the ICR's policies on record retention and data
protection legislation.
2.6. During any investigation under this procedure, no person will be told any more about the allegation
than is strictly necessary to obtain the information required and to enable the administration and
decision-making process to take place.
2.7. The burden of proof rests with the ICR. It is the ICR's responsibility to prove that assessment
conduct occurred; it is not the student's responsibility to prove that it did not occur.
2.8. The standard of proof used to consider whether or not alleged misconduct is found to have been
proven will be the civil standard, i.e. on the balance of probabilities.
2.9. In the case of the MSc in Oncology course, at the Course Director’s discretion, details of upheld
assessment misconduct allegations will be reported to the student’s NHS Trust or other healthcare
employer.
2.10. An allegation of misconduct may be investigated on one or more subsequent occasions if new
evidence emerges that, for good reason, could not have been obtained at the time. However,
consideration will be given to: the outcome that was initially obtained; the length of time that has elapsed
and the impact of this on the investigation; the severity of the offence; the impact on the student; and
whether the allegation, if found, would impact the student's fitness to practice.
2.11. There are circumstances where this procedure may be used to take action against a former
student. Examples include an investigation that has already begun and where closing the case without
conclusion would be inappropriate (such as because of the seriousness of the allegation), or where the
ICR only becomes aware of an alleged offence once a student has left and to take no action would be
disproportionate and/or harm the ICR's reputation.
2.12. This procedure is part of a wider framework that gives clear information to students about their
expected standards of behaviour. Please read the Student Charter and the relevant student handbooks
for more information, which can be found on the ICR website, intranet, and virtual learning environment.

3. Preliminary investigation
3.1. At any time, Registry may be asked to pass assessed work through TurnItIn to check for simple
provable copying of existing text. In some cases this may be routinely carried out for a particular
assessment.
3.2. Use of generative AI detection tools will not be used at this stage, to avoid false positives.
3.3. Cases of suspected assessment misconduct should be reported in the first instance to the relevant
Deputy Dean for research degrees or Course Director for taught courses.
3.4. In cases where research misconduct is suspected, the allegation should immediately be referred
by the Deputy Dean or Course Director to the Named Person under the ICR's Procedure For
Investigating Misconduct In Research, including the involvement if appropriate of the student's employer.
These allegations are handled under that procedure, and for clinical research students that of the
student's employing hospital if appropriate, from this point until the Investigation Panel produces its final
report, whereupon Section 7 of this procedure should be followed.
3.5. Where plagiarism is detected or suspected, the Deputy Dean or Course Director will usually meet
with the student and/or hold a viva to determine whether they consider that plagiarism may have taken
place, rather than, for example, poor academic practice.
3.6. Where the Deputy Dean or Course Director continues to believe that plagiarism may have taken
place, the process will then move forward to the initial investigation stage.
3.7. Even if no further action is taken, the student will be informed that concerns have been raised
about their work.
Printed on 31 July 2025 from https://nexus.icr.ac.uk/Lists/ICR%20Policies/DispForm.aspx?ID=539
Uncontrolled if printed

Approved ICR policy

4. Initial review
4.1. In cases other than those where research misconduct is suspected, the Deputy Dean or Course
Director will request that the Academic Registrar conduct an investigation as they deem necessary in
order to establish if there is a case to be answered.
4.2. In making this case, the Deputy Dean or Course Director should include evidence to support their
allegation. This may include indications of abrupt changes of writing style, mismatch with previous work,
and/or fabricated references or citations.
4.3. Authorship verification tools (e.g. GPTZero) may be used by the Academic Registrar at this stage
for all or some of the assessed material. In the use of such tools, any personally identifiable information
(such as student identifiers or patient data) will be removed.
4.4. The student will be told in writing at the beginning of the process which offence(s) they are
suspected of committing and why. The student will also be given any available supporting evidence and
a copy of this procedure.
4.5. The student will be given an initial opportunity to respond to the allegation(s) made against them.
This may involve a meeting with the Academic Registrar to discuss the allegation.
4.6. The Academic Registrar will decide whether the case should be accepted or dismissed and
whether it can be resolved at that stage or requires formal investigation.
4.7. If the case can be resolved at this stage, the Academic Registrar, with a member of academic staff,
will decide on appropriate action. If the student admits a minor offence, they will agree a proportionate
penalty as per the guidance in Annex 2.
4.8. If the Academic Registrar deems that a full investigation is necessary, they will inform the
Academic Dean, presenting the case with all the evidence received, and will nominate a member of staff
to act as Case Handler.
4.9. The student will be provided with a written outcome setting out the decision reached and/or
explaining what will happen next. If the student is unsatisfied with the decision reached or penalty set at
this stage, they may request a full investigation. A copy will be kept on the student's file.

5. Full investigation
5.1. The Academic Dean will contact the student in writing confirming the particulars of the allegation as
well as the purpose and scope of the investigation and the possible outcomes. They may request a
meeting with the student and may talk to staff or other students and consider documents and other
evidence. The student will be provided with the contact details of the Case Handler who they can contact
with any queries about the progress of the case.
5.2. If the student does not respond within one month the case will be dealt with in their absence by the
Academic Dean.
5.3. The Academic Dean will produce a report based on their investigations which outlines the process
followed, the information gathered, and their conclusions.
5.4. The Academic Dean may make a decision including if necessary the appropriate penalty (as per
the guidance in Section 10) or may refer their report to a Hearing Committee for a decision to be agreed.
5.5. The student will receive written confirmation of the outcome setting out the decision reached,
penalty set and/or explaining what will happen next. This will include copies of the information obtained
during the investigation, a copy of the investigation report and information about the next steps in the
process. The copy will be kept on the student's file.
5.6. If the Academic Dean has reached a decision at this stage and the student is unsatisfied with the
decision reached or penalty set, they may request a Review of the decision as per Section 8.

Printed on 31 July 2025 from https://nexus.icr.ac.uk/Lists/ICR%20Policies/DispForm.aspx?ID=539
Uncontrolled if printed

Approved ICR policy

6. Establishment of a Hearing Committee in
respect of all assessment misconduct
offences except those where research
misconduct is suspected and has not yet
been investigated
6.1. The Hearing Committee will be established by the Academic Dean. The Committee will consist of
three members of Senior Faculty and a student representative as nominated by the student president
where possible. The Committee members should not have any direct links with the student. One
Committee member will be nominated as the Chair, who will have a second, casting vote, in the event of
an equal split. The Case Handler will act as the Committee Secretary. The secretary shall be responsible
for providing advice to the committee and keeping the minutes of the proceedings but shall not otherwise
participate in the making of decisions by the committee.
6.2. All meetings must be minuted and a report produced at the end which should provide sufficient
detail in case of an appeal. This should be an impartial record and should be jointly approved by the
Hearing Committee and the student.
6.3. Notice of the date, time and venue of the Hearing Committee should be provided at least 10 days
before the meeting, along with details of the allegation being investigated, any evidence obtained in
relation to the allegation and any written statement provided by the student.
6.4. The student may be accompanied to the hearing by an ICR colleague or student representative. In
such cases the student must inform the Committee Secretary no fewer than 7 days before the Hearing
Committee date, providing the name and contact details of the accompanying individual.
6.5. If the student fails to attend the Hearing Committee meeting and the steps above have been
followed the meeting will go ahead in their absence.
6.6. The allegation being investigated will be presented at the start of the meeting by the Academic
Registrar. The student will then have an opportunity to respond. Either side may call witnesses but this
must be agreed in advance of the meeting. A witness who is a student may be accompanied by an ICR
colleague or student representative while giving evidence.
6.7. Once the Committee is satisfied that sufficient evidence has been presented and the student has
been given fair and reasonable opportunity to respond, the Committee shall consider its decision in
private both as to whether the allegation has been proven and, if proven, the penalty or penalties to be
imposed. The student will not be permitted to attend this part of the meeting.
6.8. If at any point during the Hearing Committee meeting the student admits to the offence the hearing
will be stopped. The student will have 3 working days to submit a statement in mitigation or explanation.
The Hearing Committee will then make a decision on the action to be taken.
6.9. If the Hearing Committee agrees that the allegation has been proven, example penalties are
outlined in Section 10.
6.10. In exceptional circumstances where it is considered that the offence was a genuine mistake, such
that any reasonable person might have made in the circumstances, no action will be taken; the student
will receive a written warning and will be reminded of the importance of the examination regulations. The
letter will be kept on the student file.
6.11. If the Hearing Committee rejects the allegation in its entirety, no record will be stored on the
student's file. A formal letter to this effect will be sent to the student and held separately by the Academic
Registrar.
6.12. The findings of the Hearing Committee should be sent to the student in writing within 5 working
days of the Hearing Committee date. The Academic Dean will also be informed of the outcome.

Printed on 31 July 2025 from https://nexus.icr.ac.uk/Lists/ICR%20Policies/DispForm.aspx?ID=539
Uncontrolled if printed

Approved ICR policy

7. Establishment of a Hearing Committee in
respect of an assessment offence where
research misconduct has been investigated
7.1. When an Investigation Panel has been convened under the ICR's Procedure For Investigating
Misconduct In Research, in relation to an allegation in respect of an original research-based dissertation,
its final report under shall be referred to a Hearing Committee if it concludes that an allegation of
research misconduct has been upheld in whole or in part. The Investigation Panel may also refer the
relevant aspects of the case to the Student Disciplinary Procedure.
7.2. Where the Named Person, Screening Panel or Investigation Panel upholds no part of an allegation,
this will be recorded by the Academic Registrar and no further action will be taken. No records will be
stored on the student's file. A formal letter to this effect will be sent to the student and held separate to
the student file by the Academic Registrar.
7.3. Where the Investigation Panel has concluded that an allegation has been upheld in whole or in
part, then the assessment misconduct process should be initiated from Section 6 of this Code noting
that:
7.3.1. The Hearing Committee does not have the power to question or overturn the Investigation
Panel's final report. Its sole function is to determine the penalty.
7.3.2. The Investigation Panel's final report will be presented to the Hearing Committee by the
Academic Registrar or named alternative.
7.3.3. The penalties available to the Committee are those relevant to research degrees and
research based dissertations.
7.3.4. The right of appeal remains the same as outlined under Section 8 of this Code.

8. Further review and final redress
8.1. Where the student wishes to appeal the findings of the decision of the Academic Dean or Hearing
Committee, they may submit a Review Form within 14 calendar days of receipt of written notification of
the outcome of the formal complaint procedure to request that the decision is referred to the Final
Review Procedure for Non-Academic Decisions and Academic Appeals. The student should explain why
they feel dissatisfied with the outcome and what remedy they seek.
8.2. If the student does not wish to appeal the findings, they may request a Completion of Procedures
letter. The letter must explain that the student has not completed the ICR's internal processes. (See OIA
guidance on issuing Completion of Procedures letters.)
8.3. If the conclusion of the Review Procedure is to refer the case back to the Hearing Committee for
reconsideration, this should be concluded as soon as possible and, where possible, within the original
timeframe of 90 calendar days.
8.4. The decision of the Hearing Committee upon reconsideration of the case will be final and a
Completion of Procedures letter will be issued, which will include:
8.4.1. the date of the end of the ICR's internal complaints procedure; a summary of the issues
considered under the complaints procedure;
8.4.2. advice on the right of the Complainant to submit a complaint to the Office of the
Independent Adjudicator (OIA), within 12 months of the date on the letter.
8.5. The OIA provides an independent scheme for the review of student complaints about a final
decision of a higher education institution's disciplinary or appeal bodies. Full details of the OIA scheme
are available from the Registry or on the OIA website: https://www.oiahe.org.uk/students/how-tocomplain-to-us/.

Printed on 31 July 2025 from https://nexus.icr.ac.uk/Lists/ICR%20Policies/DispForm.aspx?ID=539
Uncontrolled if printed

Approved ICR policy

9. Mechanisms for implementation
This document will be made available on Nexus, Canvas and the ICR's external website. Students will
be referred to it by Registry staff or members of academic staff as needed.

10. Appendix: Penalties
Sanctions range from warnings to exclusion. Factors include:
o
o
o

Intent
Extent of misconduct
Past history

For very minor offences outside of examinations, it may be appropriate to issue a written or verbal
warning rather than the penalties outlined below. The Academic Dean (or Academic Registrar at initial
investigation) will decide whether the warning is recorded on the student file or not.
Misconduct involving the use of generative AI will be judged by the same principles as other types of
misconduct. Relevant factors include whether the tool was used without disclosure, whether it replaced a
core academic task (e.g. writing, analysis), and whether its use appears intentional or negligent. The
severity of penalty will depend on the extent to which the work submitted does not reflect the student’s
own thinking, judgment, or authorship.

Table 1: Example research degree penalties
Example circumstance
Where there is evidence of minimal or moderate:
plagiarism, collusion, or inappropriate use of
generative AI (e.g. use of AI to summarise
background content without disclosure, or light
editing of AI-generated text).

Penalty
The candidate will be required to re-write the
section(s) affected, including properly
acknowledging all sources, within a specified time
period.
No re-write of other sections of the thesis will be
allowed other than minor (or other examiner
required) corrections.

Where there is evidence of substantial: plagiarism,
A candidate will be excluded from the ICR and from
collusion, or AI authorship (e.g. AI-generated thesis
any future examinations/assessments and awards
sections or analysis, submitted verbatim and
at the ICR.
presented as the student’s own work).

Table 2: Example taught course penalties
Example circumstance

Penalty

Printed on 31 July 2025 from https://nexus.icr.ac.uk/Lists/ICR%20Policies/DispForm.aspx?ID=539
Uncontrolled if printed

Approved ICR policy

Typically applied in first cases of examination
malpractice, where most of an assignment is the
student’s own work, but there is some unattributed
use of another person’s work, or there is
undisclosed use of AI tools for writing support,
paraphrasing or translation.
Typically applied in cases where:
1.
there is substantial plagiarism,
collusion, or AI use, replacing student
authorship in more than half the work; or

The student receives a zero mark for the work
submitted but retains the right to resubmit the work
with a mark limited to a bare pass.
Further education about appropriate ways to cite
and use sources, and/or AI use, will be provided.
The student receives a mark of zero for the module
in which the offence occurs but retains the right to
resubmit all elements with the overall module mark
limited to a bare pass.

2.
there is less significant unpermitted
Further education about appropriate ways to cite
plagiarism, collusion or AI use but the student
and use sources will be provided.
has previously committed an assessment
misconduct offence.
Typically applied in cases where:
The student’s registration is terminated, and they
are prohibited from registering on other ICR degree
1.
the student has engaged another
programmes.
person or generative AI tool to complete the
majority of the assignment, with minimal input
Where the student has accumulated credits prior to
from the student; or
the offence, they may still receive an award in
respect of these, unless it is found that the relevant
2.
the student has committed repeated
assessment was also subject to malpractice.
serious assessment misconduct offences.

11. Related documents
o
o
o
o
o

Guidance on plagiarism and the use of generative AI
Student Disciplinary Procedure
Final Review Procedure for Non-Academic Decisions and Academic Appeals
Student Charter
Procedure For Investigating Misconduct In Research

Printed on 31 July 2025 from https://nexus.icr.ac.uk/Lists/ICR%20Policies/DispForm.aspx?ID=539
Uncontrolled if printed
