Academic Regulations 6

2025-2026

Academic Integrity Taught Degrees v2

Academic Regulations 6:

Academic Integrity
Taught Courses

2025-2026

This document is available in hard copy and on the University
intranet and internet sites. Please contact the Information Centres
(in each campus library) or the Kingston Students’ Union Advice
Centre if you have any difficulty in obtaining a copy that you can
read, or find any aspect of these regulations difficult to understand.

Page 1 of 19

Academic Regulations 6

2025-2026

Academic Integrity Taught Degrees v2

Contents
Section
Section 1

Section 2

Section 3
Section 4

Section 5

Annex A
Annex B

Title
Introduction
What is Academic Integrity?
What is Poor Academic Practice?
What is Academic Misconduct (Breaches of Academic
Integrity)?
What are the different types of Academic
Misconduct
Plagiarism (including copying)
Self-plagiarism
Collusion
Unacceptable use of Generative Artificial Intelligence
Cheating in an examination venue
Fabricating or falsifying data or using without permission
another person’s work
Purchasing or commissioning
What is the Academic Induction Period?
What happens if there is a suspected breach of academic
integrity in the Academic Induction Period
What happens if there is a suspected breach of
academic integrity outside of the Academic
Induction Period
Step 1: Consideration by the Module Leader/Academic
Integrity Officer
Informal meetings
Step 2: Consideration by the Course Leader/Academic
Registry
Step 3: Actions by the Student
Step 4: Formal Hearing – Actions of the Hearing Panel
Step 5: Actions by the Programme Assessment Board
Consistency of Treatment
Accompaniment and Representation
Allegations raised by a third party
Anonymity
Penalties
Concurrent Offences
Compensation Regulations
Student Conduct and Behaviour Procedure
Academic Appeals
Penalties for Academic Misconduct
See Academic Guidance 2: Statement on editorial help for
students’ work: guidance for students, supervisors and
examiners published from: Policies and regulations |
Kingston University London

paragraph
numbers
1-8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
21 - 24
25 - 26

27-37
32-34
35-28
39-42
43 - 53
54
55
56-58
59-63
64-65
66-72
73-76–
77
79
79-80
Page 17

Page 2 of 19

Academic Regulations 6

2025-2026

Academic Integrity Taught Degrees v2

Introduction
1.

The University is a community bound by, among other things, a culture of
academic integrity. Students are continually supported and guided in what
constitutes academic integrity and why this enriches their experience and
bestows benefits intrinsically linked to knowledge acquisition, skills
development and qualification. Academic misconduct is, in essence, a
breach of this norm, and the application of the academic misconduct
procedure set out in Academic Regulations 6 primarily protects this culture.

2.

The academic misconduct procedure is an internal procedure designed to
examine why a piece of assessment has been judged by the Module Leader
(or tutor) to be the result of academic misconduct, and why the student
believes that this is incorrect. It is not a legal process. Should a student
wish to pursue a complaint through legal channels the matter will be treated
separately from the Academic Misconduct Procedures. Letters received
from solicitors shall be treated as legal matters. In such cases, the matter
will be referred to the University’s Governance, Legal and Compliance
Office.

3.

The procedures allow both parties to present their viewpoints. Further
information relating to accompaniment and representation can be found in
the sections below.

4.

A finding that academic misconduct has occurred is a judgement based on
available evidence, the standard of proof being the balance of probability.
What this means is that, on the basis of the evidence, it is more likely than
not that academic misconduct has occurred. Course teams are therefore
required to provide evidence that academic misconduct against the
definitions provided in this procedure has taken place. The student is not
required to prove that it has not.

5.

The University views academic misconduct very seriously. Any form of
cheating poses a threat to the academic standards of a provider’s
qualifications, and to the integrity of qualifications awarded to the vast
majority of students who achieve their qualification entirely by legitimate
means Academic Council has delegated to its Programme Assessment
Boards the authority to impose penalties for academic misconduct that may
include the termination of students’ registration and expulsion from the
University. The possible penalties are outlined in Annex A.

6.

Where a graduate of the University is found to have achieved credit for their
award through academic misconduct, the Vice-Chancellor acting on the
recommendation of Academic Council may rescind the award.

7.

These Regulations do not cover matters which have already or are currently
being considered by the Office of the Independent Adjudicator for Higher
Education (OIA), a court, or a tribunal.

8.

Student expenses for attending an Academic Misconduct Hearing will not be
reimbursed by the University regardless of the subsequent outcome.

Page 3 of 19

Academic Regulations 6

2025-2026

Academic Integrity Taught Degrees v2

Section 1
What is Academic Integrity?
9.

Academic integrity means demonstrating honest, moral behaviours when
producing academic work. This involves acknowledging the work of others,
giving appropriate credit to others where their ideas are presented as part
of a students’ work and the importance of producing work in the student’s
own voice. Contributions by artificial intelligence (AI) tools must also be
properly acknowledged. As part of a learning community students share
ideas and develop new ones- they need to be able to interpret and present
other people’s ideas and combine these with their own when producing their
work. To achieve this, students need to develop skills of reflection and selfawareness about topics such as fairness, responsibility and respect in
academic practice.

What is Poor Academic Practice?
10.

The University recognises that there is a difference between academic
misconduct and poor academic practice. Poor academic practice involves
minor breaches of discipline-specific citation and/or referencing conventions
that give no discernible advantage. In cases of poor academic practice, the
work will be marked according to the relevant grade criteria, and students
will be directed to the resources available to help them improve their
working methods and academic writing to avoid potential academic
misconduct.

What is Academic Misconduct (Breaches of Academic Integrity)?
11.

The University defines academic misconduct (breaches of academic
integrity) in assessment as any action by a student that has the potential to
give them an unfair advantage, or to aid another to gain such an
advantage.
A student’s intentions are not relevant to whether or not they have
committed misconduct. Examples of the types of academic misconduct
covered by these procedures are provided below, but this should not be
regarded as a definitive list. The University reserves the right to include
other types of academic misconduct under this procedure.

Page 4 of 19

Academic Regulations 6

2025-2026

Academic Integrity Taught Degrees v2

Section 2
What are the different types of Academic Misconduct?
12.

The University typically recognises the following types of academic
misconduct:

Plagiarism (including copying, self-plagiarism, collusion and use of
generative artificial intelligence)
13.

The University defines plagiarism as the act of presenting the work of
another person (or people) and/or content generated by artificial
intelligence (AI) tools, as one’s own without proper acknowledgement. This
also includes copying the work of another student or other students.
The University expects students to take responsibility for the security of
their work (i.e. with written work, to ensure that other students do not get
access to electronic or hard copy of the work). Failure to keep work secure
may allow others to cheat, and could result in an allegation of academic
misconduct for students whose work have been copied, particularly if the
origin of the work is in doubt.
The University will not accept a lack of understanding of the requirements
for acknowledging the work of others and/or content generated by artificial
intelligence tools as a legitimate defence for academic misconduct.
In cases where a student resubmits the same plagiarised work for
reassessment this is considered a new offence and the procedure as
outlined in these regulations must be followed.

Self-plagiarism
14.

The University defines self-plagiarism as the act of presenting part or all of
a student’s work that has been previously submitted to meet the
requirements of a different assessment which they have gained academic
credit for, except where the nature of the assessment makes this
permissible and this is explicitly stated in the assessment brief

Collusion
15.

The University defines collusion as the act, by two or more students, of
presenting a piece of work jointly without acknowledging the collaboration.
This could include a student who permits or assists another to present work
that has been copied or paraphrased from the student’s own work.
The University also defines collusion as the act of one student presenting a
piece of work as their own independent work when the work was
undertaken by a group. With group work, where individual members
submit parts of the total assignment, each member of a group must take
responsibility for checking the legitimacy of the work submitted in their

Page 5 of 19

Academic Regulations 6

2025-2026

Academic Integrity Taught Degrees v2

name. If even part of the work is found to contain academic misconduct,
penalties will normally be imposed on all group members equally.
Unacceptable use of Generative Artificial Intelligence
16.

The University defines the unacceptable use of Generative Artificial
Intelligence as the act of presenting content generated by artificial
intelligence tools (such as text, media, tables etc – list not exhaustive), as
one’s own without proper acknowledgement, except where the nature of the
assessment makes this permissible and is explicitly stated in the
assessment brief. The University will typically consider this academic
misconduct as a type of plagiarism.

Cheating in an examination venue
17.

The University defines cheating in an examination venue as including:
•

•
•
•
•
•
•

taking notes or any unauthorised materials into an examination venue.
This includes having notes available in toilets or other areas that may
be visited during the examination. If students refuse to comply with
instructions if they request to leave the examination venue during the
examination (e.g. a toilet visit), this may be considered evidence of
attempted academic misconduct.
obtaining an advanced copy of a question paper
unauthorised communication during an examination (including via
telephone or other electronic media)
removing an examination answer book from the examination venue
copying from another candidate
allowing oneself to be impersonated
impersonating another candidate.

Fabricating or falsifying data or using without permission another person’s
work
18.

The University defines the act of fabricating or falsifying data to include
presenting work that has not taken place. This includes laboratory reports
or projects based on experimental or field work. It may also include
falsifying attendance sheets for placements where this is part of the
assessment requirements.

Purchasing or Commissioning
19.

The University defines the act of purchasing or commissioning as either
attempting to purchase or purchasing work for an assessment including, for
example from the internet, or attempting to commission, or commissioning
someone else to complete an assessment.
Where students are judged to be aiding others outside the jurisdiction of the
University or are acting as an agent for a third party, they will be dealt with
under the general disciplinary processes, General Regulations 3: Student
Page 6 of 19

Academic Regulations 6

2025-2026

Academic Integrity Taught Degrees v2

Conduct and Behaviour Procedure which is available on the University’s
website.
Commissioning of proof reading is discouraged. Students should be directed
to University support services in relation to writing, spelling, punctuation
and grammar, including help from their relevant tutors. However,
commissioning proof-reading is not considered a form of academic
misconduct. There are strict rules around what is permitted, which are
provided in Annex B.
20.

These examples of academic misconduct are not exhaustive and the
University reserves the right to include other types of cheating under the
terms of this procedure.

Page 7 of 19

Academic Regulations 6

2025-2026

Academic Integrity Taught Degrees v2

Section 3
What is the Academic Induction Period (AIP)?
21.

The University recognises that students who are new to UK Higher
Education may need some time to learn how to acknowledge sources
properly. Therefore, it operates an ‘Academic Induction Period (AIP)’ during
which the focus of the University’s response to signs of plagiarism and/or
collusion is to educate students in regard to appropriate academic practice
and academic integrity rather than to penalise unacceptable academic
practice.

22.

The Academic Induction Period (AIP) applies to all full-time and part-time
students and is defined as:
•
•
•

the first academic year of a student’s registration with the University
on an undergraduate course at Level 3 or 4 only
the first teaching block on a short course for academic credit at
Undergraduate or Postgraduate Level
the first teaching block on a postgraduate course

The Academic Induction Period (AIP) does not apply to:
•
•

direct entrants at Levels 5 and 6
any form of reassessment

23.

The Academic Induction Period (AIP) covers first and concurrent
occurrences of plagiarism, copying, self-plagiarism, collusion and
unacceptable use of generative artificial intelligence. It does not apply to
other forms of academic misconduct.

24.

All second and subsequent occurrences of plagiarism, copying, selfplagiarism, collusion and unacceptable use of generative artificial
intelligence during the Academic Induction Period (AIP) should be
considered under the Formal Procedures for Dealing with Academic
Misconduct outlined in paragraphs 27 onwards.

What happens if there is a breach of Academic Integrity within the
Academic Induction Period
25. If a Module Leader determines that a summative assessment completed
within the Academic Induction Period (AIP) evidences possible plagiarism,
copying, self-plagiarism, collusion and/or unacceptable use of generative
artificial intelligence, the Module Leader should contact the Student Casework
Team to confirm it is the first occurrence that can be considered under the
academic induction period.
26.

If the occurrence is determined eligible to be considered under the AIP, an
academic will appropriately mark the work taking into account what work is
deemed original and attributable to the student, and the relevant grade
criteria. The Module Leader will invite the student to a meeting to provide
feedback and direct the student to appropriate support in relation to the
academic integrity concerns raised within their work.
Page 8 of 19

Academic Regulations 6

2025-2026

Academic Integrity Taught Degrees v2

Section 4
What happens if there is a suspected breach of Academic Integrity
outside of the Academic Induction Period?
Step 1: Consideration by the Module Leader/Academic integrity Officer
27.

In cases of plagiarism and/or collusion that are suspected outside of the
Academic Induction Period, the Module Leader (or other appropriate
authority) will hold an informal meeting with the student(s), except in a
retake period when they may proceed directly to submitting a written report
and relevant evidence to the Course Leader. The objective of the informal
meeting is to discuss the assessment and the student’s approach to
determine whether the Academic Misconduct Procedures should be invoked.

28.

When the suspected misconduct does not involve plagiarism and/or
collusion the Module Leader (or other appropriate authority) should make a
written report and submit the relevant evidence to the Course Leader.
When the Module Leader is the Course Leader the relevant evidence will be
submitted to a more senior member of academic staff.

29.

If there is evidence that a student has purchased or commissioned work
prior to submission, this will be referred to an Academic Integrity Officer
within the Academic Registry. If the Academic Integrity Officer does
consider that academic misconduct may have occurred, they will make a
written report and submit the relevant evidence to the Academic Registrar
Regulations, Assessment and Student Casework (RASC) or their nominee.

30.

Where the suspicion of purchasing or commissioning arises during or after
marking, the Module Leader (or other appropriate authority) should make a
written report and submit the relevant evidence to the Course Leader.
When the Module Leader is the Course Leader the relevant evidence will be
submitted to a more senior member of academic staff.

31.

If the suspected misconduct has taken place in an examination venue this
will be referred to an Academic Integrity Officer within the Academic
Registry. If the Academic Integrity Officer does consider that academic
misconduct may have occurred, they will make a written report and submit
the relevant evidence to the Academic Registrar Regulations, Assessment
and Student Casework (RASC) or their nominee. The evidence will include
the student’s script, if relevant, any materials collected in the room and the
(suitably redacted) Chief Invigilator's report.

Informal meeting
32.

The aim of an informal meeting is to allow the Module Leader (or other
appropriate authority) to fully understand how the student has approached
the assessment and to allow the student to reflect on their practices. This
meeting should not include note-taking other than to record one of three
possible outcomes:

Page 9 of 19

Academic Regulations 6

i)
ii)
iii)

2025-2026

Academic Integrity Taught Degrees v2

there is no evidence of academic misconduct, or
the process moves onto the formal steps of the academic misconduct
procedure, or
the student admits the presence of academic misconduct in the work.

33.

The informal meeting should not be used to discuss regulatory issues, such
as potential penalties. However, a copy of these procedures should be
available to advise students should the meeting lead to the second of these
three outcomes.

34.

Following the informal meeting, if the Module Leader (or other appropriate
authority) does consider that academic misconduct may have occurred they
will make a written report and submit the relevant evidence to the Course
Leader. When the Module Leader is the Course Leader the relevant evidence
will be submitted to a more senior member of academic staff.

Step 2: Consideration by the Course Leader or Academic Registrar Regulations, Assessment and Student Casework (RASC)
35.

Following receipt of the written report the individual considering the case
will determine whether:
(a)
(b)

36.

there is insufficient evidence to proceed. They will then notify the
person making the allegation of the reasons for not holding a hearing.
there is sufficient evidence to proceed to a formal hearing.

If the individual considering the case judges that a formal hearing is
justified, the student will be provided with:
(a)
(b)

a copy of these procedures;
written details of the allegation and a copy of all evidence provided for
the hearing by the academic who had made the allegation. This will
include specific reference to the assessment in question and the nature
of the suspected misconduct. For example:
(i)

(ii)

(c)

(d)

in a case of suspected plagiarism, the student should be provided
with a copy of their work with the sections where plagiarism is
suspected indicated which may include a copy of the Turnitin
report detailing the identified sources;
in a case of suspected cheating in an examination venue the
student should be provided with a copy of the (suitably redacted)
Chief Invigilators’ report and copies of any materials removed
from the student in the exam venue (if applicable);

advice to contact the Kingston Students’ Union Advice Centre (see
http://www.kingstonstudents.net/advice or email
support@kingston.ac.uk). Although the Kingston Students’ Union
officers cannot act as advocates, they may be able to advise on the
case and may agree to act as an observer at the hearing;
the date, time and place of the hearing. The University will try to
arrange the hearing at a time that is suitable for the student.
Normally the hearing will take place within six weeks of the date that
the student is formally notified in writing that an allegation has been
made.
Page 10 of 19

Academic Regulations 6

2025-2026

Academic Integrity Taught Degrees v2

37. Where the evidence of misconduct relates to a group of students, the
Course Leader will judge from the nature of the offence and the numbers
involved, whether to hold individual hearings or to call the group together in
a single hearing.
38. Where a student has been permitted a reassessment attempt after
academic misconduct has been found and it is suspected that he or she has
committed academic misconduct on the reassessment, this must be treated
as a new offence and all relevant stages of this procedure must be followed.
Step 3: Actions by the Student
39.

A student may decide to admit that the allegation of academic misconduct is
justified by providing a written statement. In this case no formal hearing
will take place. An appropriate member of the Regulations, Assessment and
Student Casework team will be informed of the academic misconduct and
the student’s admission and will determine the relevant penalty in line with
this procedure. It is the programme assessment board which ultimately
ratifies the final penalty which will be applied on consideration of the
student’s complete profile. Once a student admits that they committed
academic misconduct formally they cannot retract this, except in the case of
paragraph 40 below.

40.

If the student admits that the allegation of academic misconduct is justified
at an informal meeting held to discuss potential plagiarism and/or collusion,
they will have 5 university working days from the date of the informal
meeting to reflect on the decision and retract their admission if they change
their mind.

41.

If the student does not admit that the allegation is justified, they will
proceed to a formal hearing. They will be asked to confirm attendance to
either the Course Leader or the relevant administrator and to provide the
name of any person chosen to accompany the student (see paragraphs
below for further information on accompaniment and representation).

42.

If the student fails to attend the hearing within 15 minutes of the scheduled
start time without a reason that is deemed acceptable by the University, the
hearing will proceed on the basis of the evidence available to the panel.
This will include any written submission that the student may have made.

Step 4: Formal Hearing – Actions of the Hearing Panel
43.

The panel established to consider the evidence will comprise a minimum of
two members of academic staff. One of these will be designated as Chair of
the panel. The Chair of the panel will be chosen from a group of staff
designated for this purpose by the Faculty and will be independent, i.e. will
not be directly associated with the student’s learning and teaching.

44.

In normal circumstances the Academic Misconduct Hearing must not be
digitally recorded by the student. While the University allows audio
recordings of lectures for study purposes, hearings may not be digitally
recorded by students, and the notes taken by the University will constitute
the official record of the hearing. The Chair of the panel will make this clear
Page 11 of 19

Academic Regulations 6

2025-2026

Academic Integrity Taught Degrees v2

to the student at the beginning of the meeting. If the student records the
hearing notwithstanding this advice, they may be subject to action under
the Student Conduct and Behaviour Procedure. This rule may be waived in
cases where reasonable adjustments are required.
45.

The panel will normally interview:
•
•

the student, who may present documentation and/or supporting
evidence
any relevant members of staff (e.g. module leader, or Field Leader,
Course Leader or Academic Integrity Officer who will present the
evidence).

46.

The student, their representative (where present) and the staff member(s)
presenting the evidence will then be asked to leave the hearing whilst the
panel considers its decision.

47.

The panel will decide if on balance of probability i.e. that it is more likely
than not:
a)
b)

there is insufficient evidence of academic misconduct, or
there is evidence of academic misconduct.

48.

Where it is found that there is insufficient evidence of academic misconduct,
the process will be terminated and no report will be kept on the student’s
file.

49.

Where it is found that there is evidence of academic misconduct, the panel
shall then be advised of any prior instances of academic misconduct
committed by the student in order to be able to determine a
recommendation for the level of penalty to be imposed (see Annex A:
Penalties for Academic Misconduct). In the interests of natural justice this
information should not be made available to the panel prior to this point.

50.

Once a final outcome has been determined, the student, their
representative (where present) and the staff member(s) presenting the
evidence may be invited back in to the hearing to be verbally advised of the
outcome. It is recognised that there are instances where further
information may need to be sought prior to the panel making a final
decision, for example advice on detailed PSRB regulations. In these
instances, the student should be verbally advised of the need for further
information to be sought and provided with a date by which the final
decision will be advised.

51.

Following the conclusion of the hearing, a summary report will be produced
which sets out the nature of the allegations, the key discussions held, the
basis for the decision which has been made and the recommendation of the
panel concerning the level of penalty to be imposed. The student will be
provided with a copy of this report and a copy will be placed on the
student’s file.

52.

If the panel is unable to reach a consensus view, it shall find in the
student’s favour and will give the student a statement to this effect.
Page 12 of 19

Academic Regulations 6

53.

2025-2026

Academic Integrity Taught Degrees v2

If the outcome of the academic misconduct procedures indicates that a
fitness to practise issue additionally arises, the separate Fitness to Practise
procedures will be invoked. However, in these instances, it may not be
necessary to carry out the initial investigation stage of the Fitness to
Practise procedures. For further information see General Regulations 4:
Fitness to Practise.

Step 5: Actions by the Programme Assessment Board
54.

The student’s results together with any penalty recommended by the formal
hearing will be considered by the Programme Assessment Board. It is the
programme assessment board which ultimately ratifies the final overall
penalty which will be applied on consideration of the student’s complete
profile.

Consistency of Treatment
55.

The University aims to treat its students consistently across all
programmes, but it recognises that some courses lead to both a University
qualification and a licence to practise e.g. nursing and teaching. These
courses may have specific codes of conduct of professional behaviour which
will be clearly communicated to students. Any record of academic
misconduct may result in the termination of a student’s registration on one
of these courses as the University will be unable to confirm students’
suitability to practise.

Accompaniment and Representation
56.

A student may wish to seek advice from the Kingston Students’ Union.
However, this is an internal procedure and it is appropriate for students to
represent themselves with any necessary support which is permitted as
follows:

Accompaniment
57.

Students invited to attend a hearing may be accompanied by one friend,
family member, officer or staff member from the Kingston Students’ Union
Advice Centre, or a Trade Union or professional association staff member, if
applicable. The individual accompanying is not permitted to make
representations, or ask or answer questions on behalf of the student.

Representation
58.

Representation by any third party will only be permitted where there is a
compelling reason, for example, ill health and/or disability and if considered
necessary by the Academic Registrar (whose decision is final). In such
circumstances, the student must provide signed written consent for the
representation.

Page 13 of 19

Academic Regulations 6

2025-2026

Academic Integrity Taught Degrees v2

Allegations raised by a Third Party
59.

The University encourages anyone to come forward and provide information
related to any incidents where Academic Integrity is believed to have been
breached.

60.

Any allegations of academic misconduct raised to the University are taken
seriously and will be investigated in accordance with the University’s
academic misconduct procedures. To ensure a thorough investigation, the
University will request any evidence and information that can be provided in
relation to the alleged misconduct. All information will be confidential and
used solely for the purpose of investigating the matter raised. In accordance
with the principles of natural justice, the student will be provided with
access to any information and evidence provided should the case be
brought before an Academic Misconduct Panel. If no information or evidence
is provided the matter will not be investigated and will be considered closed.

61.

Details of the status or outcome of a case will not be shared with the third
party due to data protection.

62.

Where a third party has concerns pertaining to the work of a student they
should contact Academic Registry in the first instance
academicregistry@kingston.ac.uk

63.

Reports which are felt to be frivolous or vexatious may not be considered
and may be addressed under the University’s Student Behaviour and
Conduct Procedure if raised by a student.

Anonymity
64.

The University wishes to support anyone in raising concerns where
Academic Integrity is believed to have been breached. However, it may not
be possible or conducive to an investigation for allegations or matters raised
to be considered anonymously. In the principle of natural justice,
information or evidence will be provided to a student for any case brought
to a panel under our procedures. All matters will be treated sensitively and
the University will endeavour to suitably redact information provided where
appropriate.

65.

The Academic Registrar may, in exceptional cases, allow for evidence to be
redacted or withheld from the accused student where there are compelling
reasons. These justifications must be carefully considered in light of the
principle of natural justice. Compelling grounds for redaction or withholding
of evidence include but are not limited to, ensuring the personal safety of
individuals involved, safeguarding the privacy of sensitive personal
information, and preventing any potential harm to the well-being of the
third party, the accused student, or other relevant parties. The Academic
Registrar’s decision in this respect is final.

Page 14 of 19

Academic Regulations 6

2025-2026

Academic Integrity Taught Degrees v2

Section 5
Penalties
66.

The penalties in Annex A have been determined on the basis of the
following principles:
•
•
•

no student should gain any advantage over another as a result of
academic misconduct
where there is evidence of collusion, all students implicated in the case
should normally receive the same penalty
where there is evidence of plagiarism or copying group work, all those
involved will normally receive the same penalty

67.

While students may face challenging circumstances that may affect their
academic performance, it is important to note that mitigating circumstances
cannot excuse academic misconduct. However, there may be exceptional
cases where mitigating circumstances may be taken into account when
considering academic misconduct penalties. For instance, if a student was
suffering from a severe medical condition that significantly impacted their
mental or physical health, and that condition directly led to the academic
misconduct.

68.

The Programme Assessment Board has authority delegated from the
Academic Council to make a judgement on the penalty to be imposed and
this judgement is final and not subject to appeal.

69.

Where the regulations of accrediting Professional, Statutory and Regulatory
Bodies (PSRB) require, the Programme Assessment Board will terminate a
student’s registration for any occurrence of academic misconduct.

70.

Students will not be permitted further reassessment where an offence of
academic misconduct is committed at the final assessment opportunity
allowed under the Undergraduate Regulations, Degree Apprenticeship
Regulations or Postgraduate Regulations.

71.

Registration may be terminated where other penalties in Annex A are not
possible (e.g. where modules cannot be repeated).

72.

The academic misconduct penalties apply to a student for the duration of
their registration for the qualification aim upon which they were registered
at the time of the offence. For example: if a student transfers from one
programme title to another, e.g. BA (Hons) Business to BA (Hons) Business
and Management Studies, they would retain their academic misconduct
record. Whereas, a student transferring between qualification aims e.g.
Foundation Degree to a BA (Hons) top-up would not.

Concurrent offences
73.

Concurrent offences exclusively relate to instances of plagiarism, copying,
self-plagiarism, collusion and unacceptable use of Generative Artificial
Intelligence . Instances of other types of academic misconduct, such as
Page 15 of 19

Academic Regulations 6

2025-2026

Academic Integrity Taught Degrees v2

cheating in an examination or other forms of misconduct, cannot be
classified as concurrent offences.
74.

Concurrent offences occur when a student has two or more instances of the
same form of academic misconduct (either plagiarism, or copying, or selfplagiarism, or collusion or unacceptable use of Generative Artificial
Intelligence) within the same assessment period, provided that it is the
student’s first instances of that specific type of academic misconduct. For
example, if a student submits two assignments within a three-week period,
both found to have instances of plagiarism, these plagiarism offences would
be considered concurrent.

75.

Concurrent offences of academic misconduct will not be considered repeat
offences.

76.

Further instances of the same form of academic misconduct by the same
student in subsequent assessment periods will not be regarded as
concurrent offences. For instance, if the same student were to commit
plagiarism again in two further assessments in a subsequent assessment
period, these subsequent plagiarism offences would be treated as separate
repeat offences, and not concurrent.

Compensation Regulations
77.

Failure due to academic misconduct cannot be compensated.

Student Conduct and Behaviour Procedure
78.

In exceptional circumstances General Regulations 3: Student Conduct and
Behaviour Procedure will apply where academic misconduct has brought the
good name of the University into disrepute or criminal proceedings are
involved or where that misconduct constitutes any other breach of the
University’s Regulations.

Academic Appeals
79.

A student can use the procedures set out in Academic Regulations 8:
Academic Appeals (Taught Courses) to request a review of an outcome in
relation to Academic Misconduct either following the Academic Misconduct
Panel or following the final decision of the Programme Assessment Board if
there is evidence that the procedure was not followed.

80.

A student cannot otherwise appeal against the penalty imposed by the
Programme Assessment Board.

Page 16 of 19

Academic Regulations 6

2025-2026

Academic Integrity Taught Degrees v2

ANNEX A
Penalties for Academic Misconduct
Note:
•
•
•
•

•

•

The University reserves the right to terminate the registration of any
student for academic misconduct.
The academic misconduct penalties apply to a student for the duration of
their registration for the qualification aim upon which they were registered
at the time of the offence (see paragraph 72 for further explanation).
Where the regulations of accrediting Professional, Statutory and Regulatory
Bodies (PSRB) require it, the Programme Assessment Board will terminate a
student’s registration for any occurrence of academic misconduct.
Students should be aware that, following the application of a penalty
relating to academic misconduct, no further reassessment will be available if
this was their last attempt at a module, or where the University’s maximum
module or programme registration periods may be exceeded.
If a student admits to academic misconduct prior to a formal hearing, they
will receive a penalty one level lower than that which would normally be
applied for the type of misconduct identified as a first or repeat offence (see
penalty table below).
Where Academic Misconduct is confirmed as a fourth formal offence, the
penalty applied will always be Penalty D.

Penalties by Offence and Repeat Offence
Please note that the consideration of breaches of academic integrity in the Academic
Induction Period are not reflected in the Penalty tables below. Please see Section 3 of
these regulations for further information.
Offence

Plagiarism or
collusion

**
First offence
Second Offence
Third offence

A
B
C
D

Other type of
academic
misconduct
N/A
C
D
N/A

Mixed
offences*
N/A
N/A
D
D

*Mixed offences are when a repeat offence is made in a different category to the first
offence
**Penalty A is only applied where a penalty B offence is admitted to prior to a formal
hearing.

Page 17 of 19

Academic Regulations 6

2025-2026

Academic Integrity Taught Degrees v2

Summary of penalties applicable for Academic Misconduct
Penalty
Penalty A
Penalty B

Summary
Element of assessment awarded a mark of zero (Z). reassessment by
retake is permitted if required.
Module and element of assessment awarded a mark of zero (Z).
Reassessment by retake is permitted, if this is allowed by the
standard assessment regulations.
If the reassessment is being undertaken in retake mode, the penalty
only requires reassessment in the piece of work in which the academic
misconduct took place. However, where other elements are failed,
these too should be set as retake as per assessment regulations.
Where any subsequent reassessment is judged to be of the required
pass standard, the overall module result will be capped at the
minimum pass mark.
Additional learning support to be provided.

Penalty C

Module and element of assessment awarded a mark of zero (Z).
Reassessment by retake will not be permitted.
An opportunity to repeat/replace the module is permitted, if this is
allowed by the standard assessment regulations.
Where any subsequent reassessment is judged to be of the required
pass standard, the overall module result will be capped at the
minimum pass mark.

Penalty D

Module and element of assessment awarded a mark of zero (Z).
A PAB will terminate the registration and award based on credit
achieved at that point.

Page 18 of 19

Academic Regulations 6

2025-2026

Academic Integrity Taught Degrees v2

Annex B - Statement on editorial help for students’ work:
guidance for students, supervisors and examiners
This guidance is now published as a standalone Academic Guidance document (see
Academic Guidance 2) from Policies and regulations | Kingston University London

Page 19 of 19
