15773406136005Academic Integrity Policy Group
Approved by AQAEC 13th May 2025
Academic Integrity Policy Group
Approved by AQAEC 13th May 2025
15678154354830Guidelines on the Responsible use of Generative Artificial Intelligence in Teaching, Learning, Feedback and Assessment in TU Dublin
Guidelines on the Responsible use of Generative Artificial Intelligence in Teaching, Learning, Feedback and Assessment in TU Dublin
-6858008864600April 2025
April 2025

Title
Guidelines on the responsible use of Generative AI in Teaching, Learning, Feedback and Assessment in TU Dublin
Scope
The use of generative artificial intelligence systems for teaching, learning, feedback, and assessment.
This statement is a living document that will be reviewed annually and updated as Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Generative Artificial Intelligence (GenAI) technologies evolve and as other related University policies are published
Definitions
Artificial Intelligence (AI): Artificial Intelligence (hereafter referred to as “AI”) is the capability of computer systems or algorithms to imitate intelligent human behavior. It involves the ability of a digital computer or computer-controlled robot to perform tasks commonly associated with human intelligence, such as reasoning, learning, problem-solving, and decision-making.
Generative AI: Generative AI (hereafter referred to as “GenAI”) is a category of artificial intelligence that can create new content such as text, images, audio, and code.
Generative AI Hallucination: Hallucinations in generative AI are when the generative AI tools generate content that is factually incorrect, such as creating fictitious historical figures or generating links that are nonexistent.
Personal Data: Information which relates to a living individual who is identifiable either directly from the data itself or from the data in conjunction with other information held by TU Dublin.
Sensitive Personal Data: Sensitive Personal Data (or Special Categories of Personal Data) relates to specific categories of data which are defined as data relating to a person’s racial origin, political opinions, trade union membership, religious or other beliefs, physical or mental health, sexual life, criminal convictions, or the alleged commission of an offence.

Ethical Considerations
Users of GenAI must consider the ethical and legal implications when using GenAI tools. They should be aware that GenAI systems can generate harmful, misleading, biased, or discriminatory content. GenAI must not be used to promote discrimination, bias, or harm. The AI principles below can guide the use of GenAI in TU Dublin:
Fairness: GenAI should not be used to create inequitable or unfair conditions for users and participants.
Transparency: Clearly disclose how GenAI is used, especially regarding university data, and inform users when and why it is employed.
Accountability: Users of GenAI are responsible for its ethical use and any harm caused.
Respect for privacy: Users of GenAI should not collect, store, or share personal data without consent, including generating likenesses of others.
Inclusiveness: GenAI should promote equality and fight discrimination.
Reliability: GenAI outputs should be accurate and reliable.
These are expanded upon in Table 1.

Table 1: Ethical Principles on the use of Generative Artificial Intelligence
Ethical principle
Staff
Students
Fairness
GenAI should not be solely used to make decisions about the quality of a student, although it may be used supportively.
The level of information to be provided to students about GenAI use in an assessment should be clear and in line with University guidelines.
GenAI should only be used to a level allowed by assessment guidelines
GenAI should not be used to cheat or otherwise subvert an assessment process
Transparency
The requirements for the level of detail required from students about the use of GenAI in an assessment should be clearly presented and explained
Any potential uses of GenAI for marking, feedback provision etc. should be clearly presented and explained
The details of how GenAI has been used in an assessment should be presented in line with the assessment guidelines, e.g. citations, supply of prompts used
Accountability
Staff are personally accountable for the use and outputs of GenAI which are used as part of academic practice, i.e. marking decision, provision of feedback etc.
Students are personally accountable for the use and outputs of GenAI which are submitted as part of an assessment.
In group assessment, an ‘accountability agreement’ might be used to ensure everyone agrees to abide by the same standards.
Respect for privacy
Personal data should be used in line with the University’s data protection policies and data protection notices (student and staff).
Personal data should not be entered into GenAI systems that are not supported/approved by the University.
No personal data should be collected, stored or uploaded to a GenAI system, without permission/consent, including images or photographs
Inclusiveness
Staff should be vigilant to the potential for any GenAI tools used to generate inequalities, e.g. as part of individualised feedback.
Staff should include any known biases or limitations of a GenAI system that might be contrary to the University’s perspectives on equality and discrimination.
Students should actively consider the potential for a particular GenAI tool to be exclusionary or biased and call out such outputs when possible (e.g. as part of assessment feedback or reflection process).
Reliability
The outputs of any GenAI system should be reliable and validated as much as is practicable, noting the accountability requirement above.
The outputs of any GenAI system should be reliable and validated as much as is practicable, noting the accountability requirement above.

Use of Artificial Intelligence Assessment Scale (AIAS)
TU Dublin recommends the use of the Artificial Intelligence Assessment Scale in the design of assessments and for communication with students about assessments.
The Artificial intelligence Assessment Scale (Perkins, Furze, Roe, MacVaugh, 2024) is one of several traffic light systems that have been adopted by universities to guide and inform lecturers and students in the use of Generative Artificial Intelligence in assessments. In designing an assessment, a lecturer will determine which point in the scale best describes the ways in which Generative Artificial Intelligence can be used by students for the completion of this assessment. Students are then informed of this in their assessment brief. Rather than strictly enforcing a single set of rules for all assessments, the Artificial Intelligence Assessment Scale provides the flexibility for lecturers to determine whether and how Generative Artificial Intelligence can be used in a specific assessment.
The five levels on the Artificial Intelligence Assessment Scale (also shown in Figure 1) are:
Level 1: No Artificial Intelligence (AI). The assessment must be completed entirely without AI assistance. AI must not be used at any point during the assessment.
Level 2: AI-Assisted Idea Generation and Brainstorming. AI can be used in the assessment for brainstorming, creating structures, and generating ideas for improving work. No AI content is allowed in the final submission.
Level 3: AI-Assisted Editing. AI can be used to make improvements to the clarity or quality of student-created work to improve the final output, but no new content can be created using AI. AI can be used but the original work with no AI content must be provided in the appendix.
Level 4: AI Task Completion, Human Evaluation. AI is used to complete certain elements of the task, with students providing discussion or commentary on the AI generated content. This level requires critical engagement with AI generated content and evaluating its output. Any AI created content must be cited.
Level 5: Full AI. AI should be used as a 'co-pilot' in order to meet the requirements of the assessment, allowing for a collaborative approach with AI and enhancing creativity. In this case, AI can be used throughout the assessment and the student is not required to specify which content is AI generated.

Figure 1: The Artificial Intelligence Assessment Scale (AIAS) (Perkins, Furze, Roe, MacVaugh, 2024)

Principles Underpinning use of AI and GenAI in TU Dublin
Students should familiarise themselves with the capabilities and limitations of any Generative AI tool or system they propose to use, including changes that may emerge as part of a review of new product iterations, particularly those that may impact data privacy and copyright.

To support academic integrity, GenAI can only be used by students in ways that are approved in advance by their lecturer. To support this, lecturers will clearly communicate to students about the ways in which AI can be used (in accordance with an appropriate scale such as the AI assessment scale). The University will provide guidance to lecturers regarding the format and content of these communications.

The approved use of artificial intelligence systems and/or generative models are transparent and they are appropriately cited as set out in library guidelines. For citation and referencing guidelines, please consult the relevant Faculty and the AI Guidance Note available in the Referencing LibGuides from Library Services.

Recording the use of GenAI in an assessment will be in accordance with assessment guidelines and disciplinary conventions, which may require addition of details of how the system was used, in text citations or a combination of both.

From the perspective of how this is included in the output, this should be considered equivalent to other method-related details such as systematic search strategies, statistical and data analysis, image processing etc. This includes the use of any system that amends text beyond simple spelling and grammar checks.

Failure to adhere to these guidelines or the inappropriate use of AI, as determined by the relevant Faculty, may result in disciplinary action as it is a breach of academic integrity.

Where specific prompts or other initial/seed inputs are used, these should be used in line with the University’s Artificial Intelligence Information Security Policy (when commenced).

Students accept that they are wholly responsible for ensuring the veracity, accuracy and/or creative merit of the output generated by any artificial intelligence model. In addition, they assume responsibility for assessing the potential for falsification, fabrication and plagiarism because of any use of generative artificial intelligence systems/models.

References
AI Advisory Council (2025). Artificial Intelligence Advisory Council Advice Paper on Artificial Intelligence and Education. Available online at https://enterprise.gov.ie/en/publications/publication-files/ai-advisory-council-ai-on-education-paper.pdf.
EU AI Act 2024. 2024/1689. 12.7.2024. REGULATION (EU) 2024/1689 OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL of 13 June 2024. laying down harmonised rules on artificial intelligence and amending Regulations (EC) No 300/2008, (EU) No 167/2013, (EU) No 168/2013, (EU) 2018/858, (EU) 2018/1139 and (EU) 2019/2144 and Directives 2014/90/EU, (EU) 2016/797 and (EU) 2020/1828 (Artificial Intelligence Act). https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A32024R1689
Higher Education Authority (2025). Ten Considerations for Gen AI adoption in Irish HE. Available online at Ten Considerations for Generative Artificial Intelligence Adoption in Irish Higher Education - National Resource Hub.
Perkins, M., Furze, L., Roe, J., MacVaugh, J. (2024). The Artificial Intelligence Assessment Scale (AIAS): A Framework for Ethical Integration of Generative AI in Educational Assessment. Journal of University Teaching and Learning Practice, 21(6).
