Code of Student Discipline: Academic Misconduct

This Code explains how the University will proceed where students do not comply with the academic standards expected of them.

- Home

- About

- The University

- Governance and Management

- Freedom of Information

- 8.23 Information & Procedures on Student Discipline

- Code of Student Discipline: Academic Misconduct

CODE OF STUDENT DISCIPLINE: ACADEMIC MISCONDUCT

Purpose

As members of the University, students subscribe to academic regulations, which are intended to safeguard the quality of an Abertay degree and all work submitted by students is expected to constitute sound academic practice. The purpose of the Code is to be corrective if possible rather than punitive, to help and encourage students to achieve and maintain good standards of academic practice, to ensure consistent and fair treatment for all and to protect the University’s academic integrity.

Principles

Our policy and practice aligns with the principles outlined in the QAA Academic Integrity Charter and are designed to:

-

Be fair;

-

Be applied consistently;

-

Encourage students to be responsible in their use of data, sources, evidence and other information, however derived, in their academic work;

-

Not disadvantage students accused of alleged misconduct;

-

Be simple, understandable and administratively straightforward.

Practice

This Code is intended to demonstrate how the University will proceed where students do not comply with the academic standards expected of them, the process through which allegations of misconduct by students will be considered and the possible sanctions that may be applied where such misconduct is proven.

Creator

Academic Services

Approved By

Senate

Approval Date(s)

3 June 2026

Review Date

31 August 2029

Contents

1. Purpose of This Code

2. Academic Misconduct

3. Procedure in Cases of Alleged Academic Misconduct

4. Right of Appeal

5. Complaints

Appendix A - Conduct of Disciplinary Panel meetings

Appendix B - Conduct of Disciplinary Appeal Panel Hearings

Appendix C - Summary of Process

PURPOSE OF THIS CODE

The University is a community dedicated to the advancement and dissemination of knowledge through research, learning and teaching which expects, requires and promotes a culture of good academic practice. The degrees and other academic awards of the University are granted in recognition of a student’s individual achievement and no student is permitted to gain an advantage unfairly over others. Any deliberate attempt to obtain an unfair advantage by one or more of a variety of means (including, but not exclusively, those described below) will be penalised. This Code is aligned to the QAA Academic Integrity Charter and is intended to support the embedded principles by prescribing sanctions against academic misconduct by students.

In cases of joint degrees with partners, students may also be subject to the academic misconduct process of the partner.

Poor Academic Practice

The University recognizes that not all poor practice is academic misconduct and the distinction between the failure to observe good academic practice and academic misconduct is an academic judgement. The University takes seriously its obligation to encourage good academic practice across the entire University community and all work submitted by students is expected to represent good academic practice. In both the detection and handling of suspected cases of academic misconduct, this Code is intended to ensure fair, consistent, transparent and appropriate treatment for all.

Jurisdiction

The jurisdiction of the University applies in the following areas:

-

where the conduct relates to academic or other work of the University.

Examples of misconduct will include, for example, misuse of computer systems; matters of academic deceit, such as cheating in examinations, or plagiarism in coursework;

-

where the conduct relates to the academic or other work of the University but has not taken place on or within University property.

Misconduct may occur, for example, on field trips, visits to other institutions or organisations, or during work placements.

Non‐Academic misconduct

The University distinguishes between academic matters and non‐academic matters, which are dealt with elsewhere under the Code of Student Discipline: Non‐Academic Misconduct. Some cases, however, may incorporate allegations of both academic and non‐academic misconduct. Examples include that of a student who fraudulently presents false information either verbally or in writing to the University (this may include falsified medical documentation, an untrue explanation of circumstances affecting study or false reasons for absence). Other examples include that of a student found to be in possession of unauthorized materials in an examination who, when challenged, becomes aggressive and/or abusive to the invigilator. In such cases, a Student Academic Disciplinary Panel may comprise members of both academic and non‐academic staff and will be empowered to impose those penalties or sanctions found in both Codes of Student Discipline.

Criminal misconduct

The University may report to the police any allegation of criminal misconduct if it believes that this will best serve the interests of the University community or the wider public interest. This also applies to any investigations, prosecutions, and/or any enforcement or other action taken by any other bodies, including those acting under immigration regulations; national security or defence; the Student Awards Agency for Scotland; Health & Safety Executive; HM Revenue & Customs, or others.

ACADEMIC MISCONDUCT

The examples of academic misconduct described here are not intended to be exhaustive. Students who are in any doubt about whether their conduct might constitute an offence under the Code should either a) not engage in that activity or b) consult a member of teaching staff for guidance.

Plagiarism is the act of taking another’s ideas and representing them as one’s own. This may involve the use, without proper acknowledgement, of published or unpublished work (including art and digital resources), of work done partly or wholly by another person, of work obtained from an essay bank or a web site, or of recorded material from lectures and tutorials. Plagiarism includes not just the actual copying of text verbatim (which may also be a breach of copyright) or replication of code, or close paraphrasing of text, but also the unacknowledged presentation of ideas from other sources as if they were original to the author or the assembling of pieces of the work of others into a new whole.

Self‐plagiarism is the act of submitting for assessment a piece of work already (or simultaneously) submitted for assessment in the same module, another module or in another context. Self‐plagiarism also includes the submission of work that has substantial overlap with parts of work submitted elsewhere; this could include experimental results, substantive parts of essays or reports etc.

Falsification is the fabrication or alteration of data – for example, by changing data in order to confirm a hypothesis not supported by the actual data, or the invention or fabrication of the results of an experiment, which are then reported as genuine measurements. Included in falsification is the deliberate omission of data where, for example, experimental results or known facts are omitted in order to support an otherwise unsupportable hypothesis. Documentation can also be falsified and this could include for example, fraudulently inserting a signature on someone else’s behalf. In this example, it might also constitute non‐academic misconduct

False citation is the citing of a source for information, when the source does not contain that information or when the information cited was not gleaned from that source.

Academic misconduct in examinations or class tests includes the following prohibited activities:

-

Taking any device which can store data or access the internet, intranet, software or materials into an in‐person examination venue (other than those specifically permitted), irrespective of whether or not any use of the item(s) was made.

-

Taking information (including notes in any format, books, electronically stored data or illegitimately annotated copies of dictionaries, set texts, annotations made on or concealed on parts of a student’s body, etc.) into an in‐person examination venue (including toilets etc.), except where such items are left in an area designated by an invigilator. This is irrespective of whether or not any use was made of the item(s).

-

Providing University staff with incorrect or misleading information related to the examination (prior to, at or after an examination).

-

Unauthorised removal of an examination script, papers or blank examination stationery from the examination venue.

-

Unauthorized exit from the examination venue during the period of an examination.

-

Unauthorised acquisition of examination questions prior to an examination, whether or not the student is a candidate for that examination.

-

Failure to follow the rules for an examination (whether in‐person or online), in a way that might result in the gaining of an academic advantage.

Collusion is where students act together in order to deceive or cheat. This could include writing an essay for a student; providing one’s own work that could be submitted by another student for marking (either an entire piece of work or a part); assisting any student in academic misconduct relating to an examination or class test; having a third party take the place of a student, for example in an examination. Note: group‐based coursework involves co‐operation and collaboration to produce the required output so would not generally be considered a form of collusion. However, students should be careful to work within the guidelines laid down for the coursework.

Coercion is where a student puts pressure on another student or member of staff to act in a particular way, or attempts to do so, with the intention of gaining an academic advantage.

Contract cheating is where a student commissions or seeks to commission another party (either paid or unpaid) to perform academic work on their behalf.

Unacceptable use of AI (Artificial Intelligence) is where a student uses an AI tool/s to generate academic work on their behalf and presents AI ideas as their own without appropriate acknowledgement.

Research Misconduct

Postgraduate Research (PGR) students’ work may be the subject of an allegation of academic misconduct and may be dealt with under this Code. PGR students are strongly encouraged to consult the Researchers’ Code of Conduct and to seek advice from the Graduate School.

The standard of proof that will be used in all cases is the balance of probabilities. This means that any Authorised Disciplinary Officer, Academic Student Disciplinary Panel or Disciplinary Appeal Panel is satisfied that it is more likely than not that an alleged offence took place.

PROCEDURE IN CASES OF ALLEGED ACADEMIC MISCONDUCT

a. Investigation

Before embarking on any disciplinary action, it is important that the facts are established through a preliminary investigation. Alleged misconduct will initially be investigated by an Authorised Disciplinary Officer (ADO). All suspicions of academic misconduct in a piece of work should be referred to the Faculty’s delegated ADO or, in the case of partners, an appointed Partnerships Academic Disciplinary Officer (see accompanying guidance notes for academic staff).

The ADO will determine:

-

If there is a case to answer;

-

If the student (and other parties) needs to be interviewed as part of the investigation

-

If the matter can be dealt with by an in‐Faculty sanction

-

If it should be referred to a Student Academic Disciplinary Panel.

In judging whether or not there is a reasonable case, the ADO will scrutinise the work in associated with the accusation and, if there is a case to answer, conduct an interview with the student(s) concerned. The ADO will inform the student as soon as possible of the alleged offence or offences and give reasonable notice of the time, date and place at which the student should attend. Another staff member/s may be present at the meeting to assist in the exploration of the work, particularly where it is not the ADO’s subject area. At the meeting, the student may be accompanied by another member of the University community, i.e. a fellow student, a member of staff or a member of the Students’ Association.

The student will have the opportunity to present evidence and/or make a statement in mitigation as part of the proceedings, if they wish. Failure to attend the meeting will not preclude the ADO from reaching a decision, based on the evidence available. The ADO may also gather evidence from other sources, such as witness statements, and may also conduct interviews with members of staff and/or other students.

If the ADO finds there is no case to answer, no further action is taken. If it is found that there is no case to answer, the allegation can form no part of any future investigation into other allegations of academic misconduct.

If the ADO finds that there is a case to answer, they should contact Academic Services to check if a sanction for academic misconduct has previously been applied to the student. If an in‐Faculty sanction has been previously applied, the ADO will refer the case to a Student Academic Disciplinary Panel.

In‐Faculty sanctions will generally be applied for first instances of plagiarism, self‐plagiarism, unacceptable use of AI and false citation for which the following sanctions may be applied1:

-

a bad academic practice warning,

-

a grade being awarded for only that part of the unit of assessment which reflects the student’s original work, or

-

Grade F awarded for the unit of assessment with an opportunity for reassessment capped at Grade D (if misconduct occurred at the first attempt).

The sanction/s will be sent to Academic Services in order to lodge it in the student’s record for the remainder of their studies.

However, the student’s stage of study and discipline area (i.e. Law, Mental Health Nursing, Counselling, Sports Therapy, Applied Biomedical Science))2 may result in some first offences being referred direct to the Student Academic Disciplinary Panel.

Students who do not engage with the Faculty‐level process may receive an in-Faculty sanction or be referred to the Student Academic Disciplinary Panel when appropriate.

If the case is referred to a Student Academic Disciplinary Panel, a brief note of previous sanctions applied, and the nature of the misconduct concerned, will be circulated to members of the Panel along with other relevant paperwork.

The process from ADO meeting to a sanction or referral to a Panel from the Faculty will normally be completed within five working days.

When an in‐person examination irregularity occurs, the student must hand over to the invigilator any unauthorised material/devices and will normally be permitted to continue with the examination. The invigilator will retain confiscated material at the conclusion of the examination and return it to Academic Services with the Examination Report Form.

b. Student Academic Disciplinary Panel

The Student Academic Disciplinary Panel (“Disciplinary Panel”) will normally comprise a Dean of Faculty3 as Chair, another member of academic staff and the Abertay Students’ Association President, or their nominee. The Chair will not be from the Faculty in which the student is registered. An Academic Services Officer will administer the Panel, act as Clerk and take a note of its proceedings. Where a student is studying at a partner institution, a representative from the partner institution may be invited to join the panel to provide contextual insight. Details of the conduct of the Disciplinary Panel are given in Appendix A.

c. Student Academic Disciplinary Panel Sanctions

If the allegation of academic misconduct or bad academic practice is a proven, the Panel may impose one or more of the following sanctions, as appropriate (this list is not exhaustive, other sanctions may also be applied in exceptional circumstances):

-

A bad academic practice warning.

-

A written reprimand or severe reprimand.

-

Grade of F awarded for the unit of assessment with an opportunity for reassessment capped at Grade D (if the misconduct occurred at the first attempt).

-

Grade of F awarded for the unit of assessment with no opportunity for re‐assessment and a recommendation to the Programme Assessment Board that the student may be permitted to progress and carry the associated module if sufficient credit has been accumulated.

-

Grade of F awarded for the module with no opportunity for re‐assessment and a recommendation to the Programme Assessment Board that the student is unable to progress to the next stage and instead is required to re‐enrol to repeat the stage of study if sufficient credit has been accumulated.

-

Discontinuation of studies.

The level of penalty or sanction imposed will depend upon the nature of the misconduct and whether it is persistent or particularly severe.

The Disciplinary Panel will communicate its decision to the student in writing normally within five working days of the date of the Disciplinary Panel meeting. The notice confirming the decision will give details of the right of appeal. The decision will also be communicated to the Faculty and to Academic Services, in order to be lodged in the student’s record for the remainder of their studies.

RIGHT OF APPEAL

A student may appeal against the decision of an Authorised Disciplinary Officer (ADO) or a Disciplinary Panel, but only if there are valid grounds to appeal. The only valid grounds for appeal are:

-

procedural irregularity; or

-

bias or prejudice; or

-

substantive new evidence which has become available and which was not presented to the ADO or original Disciplinary Panel for good reason.

For the avoidance of doubt, lack of engagement in the disciplinary process does not, in itself, constitute grounds for appeal under (c). Only in exceptional circumstances (such as hospitalisation, suspension of studies or study break, or a material error on the part of the University) may non‑engagement be considered relevant.

An appeal against a decision of an ADO or Disciplinary Panel must be made in writing to Academic Services (StudentConduct@abertay.ac.uk), stating clearly the grounds of appeal, not more than 10 working days after the date on the ADO or Disciplinary Panel’s decision letter.

On receipt of the appeal, the Director of Student and Academic Services (or nominee) will review the case to determine whether there are grounds for the appeal to proceed.

If the appeal or complaint is deemed not to contain grounds to proceed, the student will be advised of this normally within 5 working days of receipt of the appeal. The student will be informed of their right to seek an independent review of the University’s decision by the Scottish Public Services Ombudsman (SPSO).

If the Director of Student and Academic Services (or nominee) considers that the appeal should proceed, the matter will be referred to a Disciplinary Appeal Panel (‘Appeal Panel’), normally comprising the Deputy Principal and University Secretary, or nominated alternate, as Chair and a Vice-Principal, or nominee. The Vice-Principal (or nominee) will not be the same as on the original Disciplinary Panel, or the Faculty in which the student is registered. Where a student is studying at a partner institution, a representative from the partner institution may be invited to join the panel to provide contextual insight.

Details of the conduct of the Disciplinary Panel are given in Appendix B.

Where an appeal is upheld, the Appeal Panel can remove the sanction and/or apply a different sanction. If the appeal is rejected, the Appeal Panel will review the level of penalty imposed and may confirm it, reduce it or increase it. The decision will also be communicated to the Faculty and to Academic Services, in order to be lodged in the student’s record.

The decision of the Appeal Panel is final and concludes the University’s internal procedures.

COMPLAINTS

A student who remains dissatisfied with the operation of the University’s internal processes may have grounds to complain. Following internal processes, students have the right to seek an independent review of the University’s process by the Scottish Public Services Ombudsman.

The SPSO’s contact details are:
SPSO
Bridgeside House
99 McDonald Road
Edinburgh
EH7 4NS
(if you would like to visit in person, you must make an appointment first)

Their freepost address is:
FREEPOST SPSO
Freephone: 0800 377 7330
Online contact www.spso.org.uk/contact‐us
Website: www.spso.org.uk

Appendix A ‐ Conduct of Disciplinary Panel meetings

The student will be invited to attend the Disciplinary Panel, although it may proceed in their absence (see below). The student may be accompanied by another member of the University community, i.e. a fellow student, a member of staff or a member of the Students’ Association4 for support.

The Chair will begin the meeting with panel members by outlining the procedures to be followed and summarising the allegation/s. Panel members may make initial observations and raise any queries they intend to explore during the hearing.

The Chair will then invite the student into the meeting. The Chair will outline the nature of the allegation(s) against the student and invite the student to state whether they admit or deny the allegations.

If the Panel has any outstanding queries for the Academic Disciplinary Officer or other Faculty witnesses, they may be invited to the meeting. The Chair will invite the Academic Disciplinary Officer (ADO) into the hearing at this point and invite them to make a statement regarding the decision they reached following their investigation, and/or any Faculty witness(es) present may be asked to give evidence or provide clarifications. The student will not be permitted to directly question the ADO or Faculty witness(es) but may raise questions via the Chair, who will determine whether they are appropriate to ask and put them to the others. Following this, the ADO and/or Faculty witness(es) will then be asked to leave.

The student and/or the student’s representative may at this stage present supporting evidence to the Disciplinary Panel. Evidence may include oral written statements evidence of witnesses or other written submissions, including mitigating evidence, which should have been submitted to the Clerk no less than two working days before the meeting. The Panel will only request oral evidence from a witness to the alleged misconduct by exception, where it considers this necessary to resolve specific issues relevant to its deliberations. Where oral evidence is required, the witness will be informed in advance and invited to attend the hearing at this stage of the proceedings to answer questions posed by the Panel, before leaving the hearing.

The Panel will take the opportunity to seek clarification on any points raised.
The student and/or their representative will be invited to address questions by panel members.

The student and/or their representative will be invited to give a concluding statement. This will be the final stage at which new evidence can be submitted.

When all statements have been made, and all questioning completed, all persons present other than the members of the Disciplinary Panel must leave the meeting. The Clerk will, however, remain with the Disciplinary Panel.

The Disciplinary Panel will consider the evidence and reach a decision, which will be sent to the student in writing normally within five working days. The standard of proof to be used is the balance of probabilities. The decision will also be communicated to the Faculty and to Academic Services, in order to be lodged in the student’s record.

Student Representation at Disciplinary Panels

Where a student cannot attend the meeting, they may nominate another person to represent them, but is not required to do so. Where a student elects to nominate another person to represent them at the meeting, written notification of this must be submitted in advance to the Clerk (StudentConduct@abertay.ac.uk). A student may only nominate another member of the University Community (i.e. a fellow student, a member of staff, a member of the Students’ Association Executive or University support worker) as their representative, unless there are exceptional circumstances.

Where a student has not informed the Clerk in advance that they are unable to attend a meeting and/or fail to attend, it will be at the Chair’s discretion whether the meeting proceeds in the student’s absence.

Appendix B - Conduct of Disciplinary Appeal Panel Hearings

The Appeal Panel will meet in private prior to the hearing to agree the issues to be addressed and the details of how the hearing will be conducted.

The appellant should submit any evidence no less than two working days before the hearing. Where an appellant introduces new material at the hearing, it will be at the discretion of the Panel whether to accept the evidence. The Appeal Panel reserves the right to consider any new evidence separately and may suspend or defer the hearing to consider any such submission.

The Appeal Panel may seek the assistance of a suitably qualified person at a hearing where it is considered beneficial. Such persons are not entitled to participate in Appeal Panel decisions but may provide advice to the Appeal Panel at the invitation of the Chair, either during the hearing or when the Panel is sitting in private to discuss the case in advance of the hearing or in reaching its decision following the hearing.

The Chair will invite the appellant and/or their representative into the hearing to present their case. As with the Student Disciplinary Panel, above, students may be accompanied by an appropriate supporter or they may nominate a representative to speak on their behalf. Where a student elects to nominate another person to represent them at the meeting, written notification of this must be submitted in advance to the Clerk (StudentConduct@abertay.ac.uk). A student may only nominate another member of the University Community (i.e. a fellow student, a member of staff, a member of the Students’ Association Executive or University support worker) as their representative5.

The Appeal Panel may invite a representative of the Academic Disciplinary Panel, normally the Chair, or in the case of an In-Faculty sanction, the Academic Disciplinary Officer (ADO), to attend briefly to provide a statement on how the ADO or Panel reached their decision.

The Appeal Panel will take the opportunity to seek clarification on any points raised with the Disciplinary Panel representative/ADO before they leave the hearing.

The Appeal Panel may request oral evidence from a witness to the alleged misconduct in exceptional circumstances, where it considers this necessary to resolve specific issues relevant to its deliberations. Where oral evidence is required, the witness will be informed in advance and invited to attend the hearing at this stage of the proceedings to answer questions posed by the Panel, before leaving the hearing.

Witnesses will be called into the hearing individually. The Chair will outline the procedures to be followed by any witness(es) after which any witness(es) will be called in to give evidence. The Appeal Panel will address any questions or clarifications to the witness(es), before leaving the meeting.

The appellant will be offered an opportunity to present their evidence, which may include written submissions, written witness statements or other evidence of mitigating circumstances, which should have been submitted to the Clerk no less than two working days before the meeting.

The Appeal Panel will ask questions of the appellant or their representative. The appellant or their representative will have the right to ask questions of any members of the appeal panel at the hearing.

The appellant and/or their representative will be invited to give a concluding statement. This will be the final stage at which new evidence can be submitted.
When all statements have been made, and all questioning completed, all persons present other than the members of the Appeal Panel must leave the room. The Clerk will, however, remain with the Appeal Panel.

The Appeal Panel will consider the evidence and reach a decision, which will be sent to the appellant in writing normally within five working days. The standard of proof to be used is the balance of probabilities. The decision of the Panel will also be communicated to the Faculty and to Student and Academic Services, in order to be lodged in the appellant’s record.

Where the appellant cannot attend the hearing, they may nominate another person to represent them but is not required to do so. Where the appellant elects to nominate another person to represent them at the hearing, written notification of this must be submitted in advance to the Clerk. The appellant may only nominate another member of the University community (i.e. a fellow student, a member of staff or a member of Abertay Students’ Association) as their representative, unless there are exceptional circumstances.

Where the appellant has been given sufficient notice to appear but does not attend, it will be at the Chair’s discretion whether the hearing proceeds in the appellant’s absence. Where the appellant has indicated their intention to appear but is prevented from so doing for reasons outwith their control (for example by a medical emergency or having been taken into Police custody), the Panel will re‐ convene at a later date in order to allow the appellant to attend.

Appendix C ‐ Summary of Process

- * Following the internal process, students retain the right to seek an independent review of the University’s disciplinary process by the Scottish Public Services Ombudsman (SPSO).

To receive alternative formats of this diagram please get in touch with our Quality Assurance Team.

1 In exceptional cases, students may be accompanied by an external representative, such as a carer or support worker.

2 All in‐Faculty Sanctions will be reported to the Quality Assurance Manager to ensure fair and consistent decision‐making.

3 A proven case of academic misconduct will require reporting to the Law Society of Scotland for those studying for a Law degree and may result in a referral to a Fitness to Practise Committee for students on the Mental Health Nursing programme or MSc, Counselling, Sports Therapy or Applied Biomedical Science programmes, where applicable.

4 Including Deans of Faculty, the Dean of the Graduate School and Dean of Learning and Teaching, the Dean of International and UK Partnerships, and the Dean of Enterprise and Commercialisation.

5 In exceptional cases, the Director of Student and Academic Services has authority to allow students to be represented by an external representative, such as a carer or support worker.

6 In exceptional cases, the Director of Student and Academic Services has authority to allow students to be represented by an external representative, such as a carer or support worker.

Pause carousel

Play carousel
