UNIVERSITY OF ABERDEEN
ACADEMIC QUALITY HANDBOOK
CODE OF PRACTICE ON STUDENT DISCIPLINE (ACADEMIC)
1.

PURPOSE OF THIS CODE
The University is a community dedicated to the advancement and dissemination of knowledge through
research, teaching and learning. Those objectives can only be achieved if the members of the University
community can live and work beside each other in conditions of safety and security and with respect for the
norms of academic behaviour. This Code is intended to support these objectives by prescribing sanctions
against Academic Misconduct by i) currently registered students and ii) Undergraduate and Postgraduate
Taught Graduates. In the case of Postgraduate Research Graduates, the Policy for Dealing with Allegations
of Academic Misconduct Against Graduates of the University applies and not this Code. It is expected that
students will have been made aware of what is meant by Academic Misconduct by their respective Schools
at the start of teaching/their programme. This Code should be read and applied in the light of the above.
Students undertaking courses, programmes and / or elements of assessment subject to the
requirements of a Professional, Regulatory and Statutory Body (PSRB), may be subject to an additional
regulatory framework in respect of Academic Misconduct. Where these regulations are more stringent
than those stipulated within the University's own regulations, those of the PSRB will take priority.
Frameworks which exist in this regard are listed in Appendix C, and will be widely publicised to the
students concerned.

2.

GENERAL PROVISIONS

2.1

The Head of School is mentioned throughout this Code as having responsibility for dealing with alleged
cases of Academic Misconduct. The Head of School may, however, delegate full authority under this
Code to another member of academic staff.

2.2

An Investigating Officer will be selected by the Academic Registrar from a list of members of Senate.
The Investigating Officer will be from a different School from which the allegation has been raised.

2.3

The Academic Registrar may delegate responsibility under any aspect of the Code to another member
of staff.

2.4

The standard of proof that shall be used in all cases under this Code is the balance of probabilities. This
is the same standard used in civil law proceedings. This means that a Head of School, Investigating
Officer or anyone else permitted to make a decision under this Code will be satisfied that an event
occurred if they decide, having reviewed the evidence available, that the occurrence of the event was
more likely than not.

2.5

The possible decisions an Investigation Officer can take when deciding if a case of alleged Academic
Misconduct has taken place are: proven; not proven; or case dismissed.

2.6

Reference to the CGS in the Code refers to grades available under the Universities Common Grading
Scale (or in older cases or those involving historical data, CGS refers to the previous grading system
Common Assessment Scale, CAS).

2.7

The role of internal and external examiners shall be restricted to the presentation of evidence; they
shall have no role in deciding whether a student is guilty of cheating.

2.8

When considering a case relating to an Undergraduate or Postgraduate Taught Graduate the School
and Investigating Officer will, after referring to the Policy for Dealing with Allegations of Academic
Misconduct Against Graduates of the University, investigate the case following relevant procedures
below, as if the Graduate was a registered student and will also refer to Section 7.

3.

ACADEMIC MISCONDUCT

3.1

This section outlines four separate offences that the University regards as Academic Misconduct. These
are: Plagiarism (including self-plagiarism) / collusion; Contract Cheating, other forms of Cheating and
Research Misconduct. Committing an act of Academic Misconduct in any assessment, examination
process or in any required element of a programme, whether formative or summative, can result in
disciplinary action being taken under this Code.

3.2

Plagiarism
“Plagiarism” is defined by the University as the use, without adequate acknowledgment, of the
intellectual work of another person in work submitted for assessment. This definition includes the
unattributed use of course materials and applies to all types of assessment, including ‘open book’
assessments. A student cannot be found to have committed plagiarism where it can be shown that the
student has taken all reasonable care to avoid representing the work of others as his or her own.
“Self-plagiarism” is defined as the duplication of work for assessment by submitting coursework
containing material identical, or substantially similar, to material which has already been submitted by
the same student for any other assessment.
Plagiarism through the use of artificial intelligence tools is defined as the unauthorised or
unacknowledged use of artificial intelligence tools to generate content for work submitted for
assessment.

3.3

Collusion
“Collusion” is a form of plagiarism and is therefore treated in the same way as plagiarism. It is defined
as collaboration between students in an assignment that has not been authorised by the course
coordinator. It does not refer to authorised group work that is assessed by a single group report.

3.4

Contract cheating
“Contract cheating” is an umbrella term to denote the submission of work by a student where some or
all has been produced by someone other than that student with the intention to deceive. This can be
achieved through having another person, or commercial service, produce work that is subsequently
submitted for an assessment, whether that person/commercial service is paid or not.

3.5

Other forms of cheating
“Other forms of cheating” include but are not limited to:

(a)

(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)

possession in an examination of any material or electronic device which has not been
authorised in writing by the relevant Course Co-ordinator. This also applies to the
possession of mobile phones and/or any other device on one’s person during an exam
even if that device is switched off. Students whose first language is not English may,
however, refer to a dictionary where this is approved by the Invigilator at the start of the
examination;
copying from another student in an examination;
talking to another student in an examination setting
removing an examination book from an examination setting;
bringing into an examination room any other examination book, or part of one;
impersonating another candidate in relation to any assessment;
permitting another person to impersonate oneself in relation to any assessment;

Approved by the University Court (June 2024)

2

(h)
(i)

producing work for another student to use and;
any other conduct reasonably considered to amount to cheating as decided by the Head
of School on a case by case basis.

3.6

Research Misconduct

3.6.1

“Research Misconduct” applies to students studying a fully research-based programme such as the
Master of Research or PhD. “Research Misconduct” is defined by the University as:
The fabrication, falsification, plagiarism or deception in proposing, carrying out or reporting results of
research, or deliberate, dangerous or negligent deviations from accepted practices in carrying out
research. It includes failure to follow established protocols (incl. ethical approval) if this failure results
in unreasonable risk or harm to humans, other -organsims, or the environment, and facilitating of
misconduct in research by collusion in, or concealment of, such actions by others. It also includes
financial impropriety in accounting for research funds, intentional unauthorised use, disclosure or
removal of, or damage to, research-related property of the University or of another, including
apparatus, materials, writings, data, hardware or software or any other substances or devices used in
or produced by the conduct of research. It also includes mismanagement or inadequate preservation
of data and/or primary materials, breach of duty of care to research participants, animal subjects,
human organs or tissue used in research, or for the protection of the environment, and also behaviour
that constitutes bullying and harassment. This list is not exhaustive and further examples of research
misconduct are explained in the University of Aberdeen Research Governance Handbook

3.6.2

Research Misconduct does not include honest error or honest differences in the design, execution,
interpretation or judgement in evaluating research methods or results, or misconduct unrelated to the
research process. Similarly, it does not include poor research unless this encompasses the intention to
deceive.

4.

SCHOOL PROCEDURE IN CASES OF ACADEMIC MISCONDUCT

4.1

Preliminary Investigation for all forms of academic misconduct

4.1.1

Where there is reason to believe that Academic Misconduct may have taken place, the Head of School
shall decide if it is appropriate to conduct a Preliminary Investigation in accordance with section 4.1.3.

4.1.2

The possible outcome following a Preliminary Investigation depends on the nature of the allegation
and in the case of Plagiarism/Collusion whether the student has been found guilty of
Plagiarism/Collusion before. The outcomes and processes for allegations of Plagiarism/Collusion in a
course at level 1-5 (taught element only) are outlined in section 4.2 with the outcomes and processes
for other forms of Academic Misconduct outlined in section 4.3 and section 4.4.

4.1.3

The procedure to be followed by the Head of School when conducting a Preliminary Investigation is as
follows, with further provisions applying to both Preliminary Investigation meetings and Discipline
Hearings outlined in Appendix A:

(a)
(b)

(c)

a meeting, held on campus or online (e.g. Microsoft Teams) should be arranged with the student
no later than 10 working days after the allegation is raised;
the student should be contacted, in writing, outlining the reasons for the meeting, clearly stating
the allegation, and confirming that they may be accompanied by another person if they wish. At
the same time the student must be provided with copies of all evidence supporting the allegation
of Academic Misconduct. Such meetings will be held in the appropriate way, whether on-campus
or online;
another member of staff shall be present at the meeting for the purpose of taking a record of the

Approved by the University Court (June 2024)

3

(d)

discussion, and additional staff members may be present if the Head of School requests; and
the student should be sent a copy of the meeting’s outcome and record of the discussion to
confirm its accuracy, no later than 5 working days after the meeting is held.

4.2

School dealing with alleged Plagiarism/Collusion by students in taught courses at level 1-5

4.2.1

Where an allegation of Plagiarism or collusion is made against a student registered in a course at level 15 (not including the project or dissertation element of a PGT programme) the Head of School shall
contact the Registry to ascertain whether the student has been found guilty of committing
Plagiarism/Collusion under this Code before. In determining if a student has committed
Plagiarism/Collusion before the Registry will take into account the date the outcome of a previous case
was communicated to the student and its relationship to the submission date of the new piece of work.
Assuming the student had submitted the work under investigation after a previous finding of
Plagiarism/Collusion was made under this Code the allegation shall be taken to relate to a second
offence.

4.2.2

The Head of School shall then conduct a Preliminary Investigation as outlined in 4.1.3 above.

4.2.3

The Head of the School, having completed the Preliminary Investigation and considered all of the
evidence submitted, may:
(a)
decide that plagiarism/collusion has not occurred and dispose of the case, or
(b)
decide that plagiarism/collusion has occurred.

4.2.4

If the Head of the School decides that plagiarism/collusion has not occurred the case should be disposed
of as follows:
(a)
the student should be written to within 5 working days informing them that no further
proceedings will be taken;
(b)
in the case of plagiarism, the student shall be informed that the mark awarded for the
assessment in question will reflect the amount of independent work of the student and
appropriately referenced work of the student and the student shall be provided, in writing,
the University’s definition of Plagiarism and guidance on its avoidance, including how to
reference material correctly;
(c)
in the case of collusion, the student shall be informed that the mark awarded for the
assessment in question will reflect the amount of independent work of the student and
the student shall be provided with guidance on when, and under what circumstances,
group assignments are acceptable.

4.2.5

If the Head of School decides that Plagiarism/Collusion has occurred, and this is the first time the
student has been found to have committed such an offence further to section 4.2.1 above, they shall
have the following outcomes available to dispose of the case. The outcome chosen can be based on
consideration of mitigating circumstances raised by the student during the Preliminary Investigation or
the general significance of the elements of the assessment in question:

(a)
(b)

(c)

to award a mark of G3 for the assessment in question;
to allow the student to resubmit the work in question for assessment, taking into account
advice given during the meeting on avoiding plagiarism/collusion and any other support
deemed appropriate for the specific case (which may include referral to the Student
Learning Service for advice and support) with the ultimate grade for the assessment in
question being capped at a D3 where deemed appropriate; and
In the case of plagiarism, to ask that the work be assessed, ignoring the plagiarised
elements, and a mark provided in the usual way.

Approved by the University Court (June 2024)

4

4.2.6

After choosing an outcome the Head of School must write to the student within 5 working days of the
meeting confirming that the outcome will be passed to the Academic Registrar who will issue a formal
written warning to the student that any future allegation of Plagiarism/collusion will be dealt with
under the Code and the nature of the penalty that may be imposed in such a case. The finding of
Plagiarism/Collusion, and the specific outcome, shall then be recorded on the student’s record by
Registry.

4.2.7

If the Head of School decides that plagiarism has been committed, and the student has previously been
found to have committed plagiarism further to section 4.2.1 above, the Head of School shall refer the
matter to the Academic Registrar in accordance with section 5. The Head of School must inform the
student in writing that the matter is being referred to the Academic Registrar for a Discipline Hearing
to be arranged under this Code. Similarly, if the Head of School decides that collusion has been
committed, and the student has previously been found to have committed collusion further to section
4.2.1 above, the Head of School shall refer the matter to the Academic Registrar in accordance with
section 5. The Head of School must inform the student in writing that the matter is being referred to
the Academic Registrar for a Discipline Hearing to be arranged under this Code.

4.2.8

The Head of School shall have the discretion to refer any case where plagiarism/collusion is suspected
for further investigation though the Academic Registrar in accordance with section 5. The Head of
School must inform the student in writing that the matter is being referred to the Academic Registrar
for a Discipline Hearing to be arranged under this Code.

4.3

School dealing with alleged Contract Cheating by students in taught courses at level 1-5

4.3.1

Contract cheating is an umbrella term to denote the submission of work by a student that has been
produced by someone other than that student with the intention to pass the work off as their own.
Suspicion that a student has submitted work that has not been written by them may arise when there is
a disparity in the grades awarded, or the style or fluency of writing, in an assessment in comparison to
other assessments submitted by that student or in comparison to their overall performance in
tutorials/discussion groups. It may indicate that the assessment has been purchased or otherwise
acquired from a third-party supplier, e.g. an essay mill (essay writing service), purchased (for money or
other goods/services) from another individual or produced by any other person on behalf of the student.

4.3.2

Where an allegation of Contract Cheating is made against a student, the Head of the School shall conduct
a Preliminary Investigation as outlined in section 4.1.3 above. Students should be advised in advance that
they may be interviewed, that the meeting will be recorded and that they may be required to submit
additional information prior to, or following, the Preliminary Investigation.

4.3.3

The student may be interviewed to assess their level of understanding of the work submitted. This
interview should be carried out by the Head of School, or their appointed nominee. If the interview takes
place it will be recorded and notes taken to help inform future investigations.

4.3.4

The Head of the School, having held the Preliminary Investigation and considered all of the evidence
submitted, may:
(a) decide that Academic Misconduct has not occurred; or
(b) decide that there are good reasons for believing that Academic Misconduct may have
occurred.

4.3.5

If the Head of the School decides that Academic Misconduct has not occurred, they shall write to the
student within five working days of the meeting informing them that no further action will be taken.

Approved by the University Court (June 2024)

5

4.3.6

If the Head of School decides that Academic Misconduct may have occurred, they shall refer the matter
to the Academic Registrar in accordance with section 5. The Head of School must inform the student
in writing that the matter is being referred to the Academic Registrar for a Discipline Hearing to be
arranged under this Code.

4.4

School dealing with other cases of Academic Misconduct

4.4.1

Where an allegation of Academic Misconduct is made against a student that is not covered by section
4.2 and 4.3, the Head of the School shall conduct a Preliminary Investigation as outlined in section 4.1.3
above.

4.4.2

The Head of the School, having held the Preliminary Investigation and considered all of the evidence
submitted, may:
(a) decide that Academic Misconduct has not occurred; or
(b) decide that there are good reasons for believing that Academic Misconduct may have
occurred.

4.4.3

If the Head of the School decides that Academic Misconduct has not occurred, they shall write to the
student within 5 working days of the meeting informing them that no further action will be taken.

4.4.4

If the Head of School decides that Academic Misconduct may have occurred, they shall refer the matter
to the Academic Registrar in accordance with section 5. The Head of School must inform the student
in writing that the matter is being referred to the Academic Registrar for a Discipline Hearing to be
arranged under this Code.

5.

REFERRING A CASE FOR A DISCIPLINE HEARING

5.1

Cases must be referred in writing to the Academic Registrar within five working days of the conclusion
of the Preliminary Investigation. When referring a case to the Academic Registrar no less than the
following should be provided:

•
•
•
•

•
•
•

a covering letter or email confirming the full details of the allegation;
a copy of the record taken at any meeting/discussion held during the Preliminary Investigation;
the original piece(s) of work clearly identifying the sections in which Academic Misconduct is
alleged to have taken place;
for Plagiarism cases:
a)
the source of the plagiarised material should be clearly marked on the original
piece(s) of work submitted to identify the corresponding section(s) and, if
available, the Originality report;
b)
the source(s) of the plagiarised materials;
c)
copies of relevant Student Handbook(s), Course Handbook(s) and any other
written material routinely provided to students drawing their attention to the
University’s definition of Plagiarism together with additional details of information
and support provided to students on how to avoid Plagiarism;
for collusion cases - copies of relevant Student Handbook(s), Course Handbook(s) and any other
written material routinely provided to students drawing their attention to the rules regarding
the boundaries for collaborative working;
For contract cheating cases – copies of examples of the student’s work, including the piece
under investigation and notes/recording of the interview carried out to assess their
understanding of the work submitted for assessment;
written reports from individuals, Tutors or Invigilators present at the time that the alleged
offence took place (if applicable).

Approved by the University Court (June 2024)

6

5.2

On receipt of a properly referred case the Academic Registrar shall then arrange for a Discipline Hearing
to be conducted in accordance with the procedures in this Code.

5.3

When arranging a Discipline Hearing the Academic Registrar shall select an Investigating Officer to hear
the case in accordance with this Code. They shall also ensure a Clerk is present at the meeting to take
a general note of discussion and to provide guidance on procedure and the application of this Code.

6.

STANDARD OUTCOMES FOLLOWING A DISCIPLINE HEARING

6.1

General Provisions

6.1.1

The penalties which can be imposed by an Investigating Officer following a Discipline Hearing where
an allegation of Academic Misconduct is proven are as set out in sections 6.2 to 6.8 below.

6.1.2

An Investigating Officer has the discretion to impose a lesser or reasonable alternative penalty than
provided in this Code where it is thought appropriate to do so having reviewed all the evidence in the
case and any statements or explanations provided by the student.

6.1.3

If the penalty imposed means that the student fails the course, the normal rules for resit examination,
re-submission of assessed work or other re-assessment for that course shall apply.

6.1.4

Where a reassessment diet arises before the conclusion of proceedings under the Code, the student
should be allowed to submit for reassessment, but the grade should be withheld by the School until
the outcome of proceedings are known and applied.

6.1.5

Where mentioned, expulsion means the termination of matriculated student status involving a total
prohibition on attendance at or access to the University and on any participation in University activities.
A student who has been expelled will not usually be eligible for re-admittance to the University.

6.1.6

Where a student is expelled under this Code, if they have already satisfied the requirements for an
award prior to the offence(s) being committed, they will be allowed to graduate with that award.

6.1.7

In the context of an Undergraduate or Taught Postgraduate Graduate the wording within a penalty
relating to expulsion is not applicable (see Section 7).

6.1.8

An Investigating Officer can make alterations to the process to be followed at a Discipline Hearing where
it is reasonable to do so, AND the student agrees to the alterations in advance.

6.2

Standard outcome for a first offence of Plagiarism/Collusion in a level 1-5 taught course

6.2.1

The student shall be awarded CGS G3 for the component of assessment (for example, a written
examination or piece of in-course assessment) in which they are found guilty.

6.2.2

Where a student has been found guilty of Plagiarism/Collusion in any component of assessment for
more than one course, or more than one component within one course, the student shall be awarded
an overall CGS G3 for the course(s).

6.2.3

If the imposition of a penalty under section 6.2.2 means that the student fails the course and a resit is
permitted, the CGS mark attainable following reassessment will be restricted to a maximum of CGS D3.

Approved by the University Court (June 2024)

7

6.3

Standard outcome for a subsequent offence of Plagiarism/Collusion in a level 1-5 taught course (also
see section 6.4 below)

6.3.1

Where a student is found guilty of Plagiarism/Collusion in any component of assessment for the second
time the student shall be awarded an overall CGS G3 for the course(s) and may be expelled.

6.4

Standard outcome for Cheating/Plagiarism/Collusion in Taught Postgraduate Programmes:
Dissertation or Elements Contributing one-third or more of the Programme

6.4.1

The student shall be awarded CGS G3 for the overall course mark (or the equivalent unit of assessment)
in which the assessment of which they are judged to have Cheated/Plagiarised relates.

6.4.2

No resit examination, re-submission of assessed work or other re-assessment shall be permitted, nor
can any other course be substituted for that which has been failed under that section.

6.4.3

Where a student is judged to have Cheated/Plagiarised/Colluded in any component of assessment for
more than one course the student shall be awarded CGS G3 for the course(s) and will usually be
expelled.

6.5

Standard outcome for students found guilty of contract cheating

6.5.1

Students who are found guilty of submitting work that has been partly or wholly undertaken by
someone other than themselves (“contract cheating”, as defined in Section 3.4) shall be awarded an
overall CGS G3 for the course in question and will usually be expelled from the University.

6.6

Standard outcome for students found guilty of any other form of cheating

6.6.1

Students who are found guilty of any other form of cheating shall be awarded an overall CGS G3 for
the assessment or course in question depending on the severity of the case and may be expelled.

6.6.2

If the imposition of a penalty under section 6.2.1 means that the student fails the course and a resit
is permitted, the CGS mark attainable following reassessment will be restricted to a maximum of CGS
D3.

6.7

Standard outcome for Research Misconduct

6.7.1

The student shall fail the degree in respect of which Research Misconduct is established and shall not be
permitted to submit work for this or any other research degree of the University. The student shall be
expelled from the University.

6.8

Standard outcome for students found guilty of a second offence of academic misconduct

6.8.1

Students who are found guilty of more than one instance of academic misconduct of any sort shall
usually be expelled. For example, a student who is found guilty of their second case of plagiarism and
who is then found guilty of their second case of collusion, or their first case of another form of
cheating, shall be expelled from the University.

Approved by the University Court (June 2024)

8

7

UNDERGRADUATE AND POSTGRADUATE GRADUATES

7.1

If the penalty imposed in Section 6 means that the graduate’s Degree/Diploma/Certificate award is
affected the Investigating Officer will decide, in consultation with the relevant School(s) as
appropriate, whether a lower award is possible, or whether the award should be rescinded. Also refer
to Section 4 of the Policy for Dealing with Allegations of Academic Misconduct Against Graduates of
the University.

8

RIGHTS OF APPEAL

8.1

A student has the right of appeal against any decision made under this Code using the University’s
Policy and Procedures on Student Appeals but only if there are valid grounds to appeal. Full details on
this process and the grounds on which an appeal can be submitted are available on the University
Website by consulting the University’s Policy and Procedures on Student Appeals.

Approved by the University Court (June 2024)

9

APPENDIX A
Preliminary Meetings and Discipline Hearings

1

Procedure when arranging a meeting/Discipline Hearing under this Code

1.1

The student who is the subject of action under this Code shall be informed in writing of any allegations made
against him or her and the date, time and location of the proposed meeting/Discipline Hearing. Such
meetings will be held in the appropriate way, whether on-campus or online. Normally notice of at least five
working days shall be given of any meeting that requires the student’s attendance.

1.2

The student shall be provided a copy of this Code and any other relevant Codes of Practice as part of the
initial communication regarding the meeting/Discipline Hearing. The student shall also be provided with
copies of all written submissions which are to be considered at the hearing.

1.3

The student shall be invited to respond in writing to allegations but shall not be required to do so.

1.4

The student shall be required to confirm that they will attend the hearing on the specified date/time and
provide details of any witnesses they wish to be present at the meeting/Discipline Hearing.

2

Representation

2.1

The student may be accompanied or represented at any meeting/Discipline Hearing by one person of his or
her choice. The Head of School/Investigating Officer has the discretion to permit additional persons to
accompany the student at any meeting/ Discipline Hearing, though the student must request this in
advance.

2.2

Where a student is alleged to have committed an offence under this Code with another individual, that
individual may not accompany the student at any meeting/Discipline Hearing connected with the offence.
That other individual may, however, be called as a witness at the meeting by either the Head of
School/Investigating Officer or the student to which the meeting/Discipline Hearing relates.

2.3

The University will not provide legal or other representation for students subject to proceedings under this
Code. Students can seek independent advice on the application of this Code, and obtain representation at
a meeting/Discipline Hearing, from Aberdeen University Students’ Association.

3

Extenuating or Mitigating Circumstances

3.1

The University Policy and Procedures on Student Appeals and Complaints stipulates that if a student
believes that a medical condition or other personal circumstances have affected their performance in an
assessment they must notify the Head(s) of the relevant School(s) in writing, not more than seven days
after the date of submission of the assessment or exam concerned.

3.2

Where a student has not given notice of extenuating or mitigating circumstances within the required
timescale, they cannot be accepted as evidence under this Code unless permitted by the Head of School
after a satisfactory explanation for the delay in providing the information is given.

3.3

Medical or extenuating circumstances which have not been raised prior to a Discipline Hearing will not
normally be accepted as evidence. If raised for the first time after the Preliminary Investigation has taken
place it will be at the Investigating Officer’s discretion as to whether it is necessary for the Discipline Hearing
to be adjourned and the evidence referred back to the Head of School to decide whether there are grounds
on which to accept the late notification. The Head of School will make this decision having regard to the

Approved by the University Court (June 2024)

10

expected timescale for submission of such evidence and the reason for this delay. Their decision will be final.
Once this decision has been taken, if the Head of School decides the case still requires further investigation
under this Code, a new Discipline Hearing shall be arranged in accordance with this Code.

4

Determination of a case in the absence of the student

4.1

Where a student cannot attend an initial meeting/Discipline Hearing, as an alternative, they can either ask
for it to be rescheduled (one change only is permitted), select another person to represent him or her, or
submit further representations in writing, but shall not be required to do so. Where a student elects to select
another person to represent him or her, written notification of this must be submitted to the School and/or
Registry no later than two working days prior to the date of the hearing.
Meetings are permitted via MS Teams video calling or similar. Where the cost of an overseas teleconference
carries a fee, the cost shall be borne by the student whose conduct is under scrutiny.

4.2

Where a student cannot attend an initial interview or hearing and requests that the interview or hearing
be deferred to allow him/her to attend in person, the student cannot subsequently use the impact which
the deferral of the interview or hearing may have on their academic performance as grounds for an appeal
or complaint.

4.3

In the event that an initial interview or hearing is deferred at the request of the student the interview or
hearing must be rescheduled to take place on a date normally within 6 weeks of the date originally notified
to the student. If the student is unable to attend the rescheduled interview or hearing, the case will be
considered, and a decision reached in the absence of the student. Under the terms of paragraph 4.1 the
student can either select another person to represent him or her or submit further representations in
writing.

4.4

Where a student has not informed the School/Registry in advance that they are unable to attend a
meeting/Discipline Hearing, or is a no show, and has not asked for the meeting to be rescheduled will have
their case considered, and a decision reached in the absence of the student.

Approved by the University Court (June 2024)

11

APPENDIX B
Procedure at a Discipline Hearing

1. The Investigating Officer will outline the procedures to be followed, after which the witness(es)
will be asked to leave until called to give evidence.
2. The Investigating Officer will then outline the nature of the allegation(s) against the student and
invite the student to state whether they admit or deny the allegation(s).
3. The Investigating Officer will invite the Head of the School to make a statement on behalf of the
School. The Head of School making the allegation of Academic Misconduct may, at this stage,
present supporting evidence to the Investigating Officer. Supporting evidence may include oral
testimony of witnesses or previously submitted written evidence.
4. The Investigating Officer will invite the student to make a statement in response to the Head of
School and the allegation made against them.
5. The student and/or the student’s representative may, at this stage, present supporting evidence
to the Investigating Officer. Evidence may include oral evidence of witnesses or written
submissions.
6. The student and/or their representative will be invited to address questions through the
Investigating Officer to any witness(es) on their statement(s) and on their written submissions
at the time they give their evidence to the Discipline Hearing after which they shall be asked to
leave until formally dismissed by the Investigating Officer or the Clerk.
7. The Investigating Officer will take the opportunity to seek clarification on any points raised.
8. The student and/or their representative will be invited to give a concluding statement.
9. When all statements have been made, all witnesses heard and all questioning completed, all
persons present other than the Investigating Officer and the Clerk must leave the room. The
Clerk remains with the Investigating Officer solely for the purpose of recording the Investigating
Officer’s decision and takes no part in the decision-making process.
10. The Investigating Officer will consider the evidence and reach a decision, which will be
communicated to the student in writing, normally within five working days.
11. Where the Investigating Officer feels the need to obtain additional supporting evidence or
clarification from another party, the normal decision-making framework may be delayed. The
student will be advised of any delay and, where possible, the student will be advised of this at the
end of the Discipline Hearing.
12. Having reviewed any additional evidence or clarification the Investigating Officer can decide to
issue his final decision through the Clerk or can ask for the Discipline Hearing to be reconvened
as soon as possible to present his or her findings and reach a final decision.

Approved by the University Court (June 2024)

12

APPENDIX C
Professional, Statutory and Regulatory Body (PSRB) Frameworks

Approved by the University Court (June 2024)

13
