Regulations on
Student Discipline
AU-UESEC-25-6663-A

Applicable to all students and learners enrolled or reenrolled from 1st August 2026

2026-27

AU-UESEC-25-6663-A

2026/27

CONTENTS
Regulation Summary......................................................................................................................3
Related Regulations, Policies, and Guidance ................................................................................3
Version Control ..............................................................................................................................3
PART A KEY DEFINITIONS .............................................................................................................4
PART B STUDENT DISCIPLINE ......................................................................................................7
B1

Disciplinary Offences..........................................................................................................7

B2

Criminal Offences .............................................................................................................10

B3

Precautionary Exclusion ...................................................................................................11

B4

Role and Powers of Authorised Officers (non-academic offences) ..................................11

B5
Process for Consideration of Allegations of Breaches of Discipline (non-Academic
Offences) .....................................................................................................................................13
B6
PART C
C1

Process for Consideration of Allegations of Breaches of Assessment Regulations .........14
ACADEMIC MATTERS ..............................................................................................15
Definitions.........................................................................................................................15

C2
Process for the Consideration of Allegations of Academic Offences, and the Role and
Powers of the Academic Offences Officer ...................................................................................17
PART D
D1

UNIVERSITY DISCIPLINARY BOARD .....................................................................20
Cases referred to the University Disciplinary Board .........................................................20

Penalties for Non-Academic Offences .........................................................................................20
PART E
E1

UNIVERSITY ACADEMIC MISCONDUCT BOARD ..................................................21
Cases referred to the University Academic Misconduct Board .................................21

Penalties for Severity 4 Academic Offences ...........................................................................22
PART F
F1

RIGHT OF APPEAL ...................................................................................................23
Appeal against the decision of the Authorised Officer or Academic Offences Officer ......23

F2
The Senate Disciplinary Appeals Committee for cases heard initially by a University
Disciplinary Board or a University Academic Misconduct Board ..................................................24
F3

Procedures of the Senate Disciplinary Appeals Committee .............................................24

F4

The Office of the Independent Adjudicator for Higher Education .....................................26

APPENDIX: Summary of Process for the Consideration of Allegations of Academic Offences
27
School Referral to Academic Offences Officer.............................................................................27
Stage One Hearing with Academic Offences Officer (Student Present) ...... Error! Bookmark not
defined.
Stage One hearing with Academic Offences Officer (Student not present) .................................27
Process following completion of Stage One hearing with Academic Offences Officer ................29
Stage Two hearing with Academic Offences Officer ....................................................................30
Refer to the University Academic Misconduct Board ...................................................................31

2

AU-UESEC-25-6663-A

2026/27

Regulation Summary
These regulations set out the University’s processes relating to disciplinary action that can
be implemented in cases where students infringe on the Charter and Statutes, Ordinances,
and Regulations of the University, including:
▪

Definitions of important disciplinary terms, including penalties, appeals, and key roles
in the University’s disciplinary processes.

▪

A list of example breaches of discipline, including behavior, committing fraud, and
criminal offences.

▪

How the University processes breaches of student discipline relating to harassment
and sexual misconduct under OfS Condition E6 for Registration.

▪

Processes for the precautionary exclusion of students, whilst full disciplinary
procedures take place.

▪

Processes for different types of offences, including non-academic breaches of
discipline and breaches of examination regulations, and academic offences.

▪

The powers of the University Disciplinary Board, the process for referring cases to
the Board, and the penalties at the Board’s disposal.

▪

The powers of the University Academic Misconduct Board, the process for referring
cases to the Board, and the penalties at the Board’s disposal.

▪

The process for appeal and referring cases to the Office of the Independent
Adjudicator for Higher Education.

Note: In the rare case of disciplinary cases spanning academic years, the case will follow
the procedures set out in the regulations from the academic year in which the alleged offence
was committed.
Related Regulations, Policies, and Guidance
The University Disciplinary Board Procedures and the University Academic Misconduct
Board procedures set out the regulations and processes of the Boards in further detail. The
Tariff of Penalties for Academic Offences define the powers and penalties available in
academic offences cases. The Aston Student Code of Conduct sets out what the University
deems as unacceptable student behaviour, and the possible penalties and sanctions
available.
Precautionary Exclusion Risk Assessment Forms are available on the University’s
Disciplinary webpage.
Version Control
Ref No

Versio
n

Responsible Officer

Approved by

Approval
Date

Effective
Date

AU-RSC-18-1862
AU-RSC-19-2816
AU-RSC-20-3967
AU-RSC-21-4834

A

Adam Hewitt

ULTC

Jun 2019

Sep 2019

A

Adam Hewitt

ULTC

Jun 2020

Sep 2020

A

Adam Hewitt

ULTC

Jun 2021

Sep 2021

A

Adam Hewitt

ULTC

Jul 2022

Sep 2022

3

AU-UESEC-25-6663-A
AU-RSC-22-5443
AU-RSC-24-6408
AU-RSC-24-6408
AU-QEASC-24-6515
AU-UESEC-25-6663

2026/27

A

Adam Hewitt

ULTC

Jun 2023

Aug 2023

A

Head of Quality Assurance

ULTC

Jun 2024

Aug 2024

B

Head of Quality Assurance

UESEC

Feb 2025

Feb 2025

A

Head of Quality Assurance

UESEC

Jul 2025

Aug 2025

A

Head of Quality Assurance

UESEC

Jul 2026

Aug 2026

PART A KEY DEFINITIONS
A1.1

Students of the University are subject to the Charter and Statutes of the University
and to Ordinances, Regulations and other rules made under them. Infringements of
such rules may render the student liable to disciplinary action in addition to any other
penalty set down in the legislation. Nothing in these Regulations shall prevent the
making of local rules of conduct and behaviour relating to particular facilities or areas
of the University, and made by the person(s) responsible for those facilities or areas,
provided that such rules are consistent with the Charter, Statutes, Ordinances and
Regulations.
All students, their representatives, and University staff involved in Disciplinary
processes are expected to act reasonably and fairly towards one another, and to
treat all disciplinary processes with respect.
The University celebrates the rights of freedom of speech and academic freedom
and is committed to protecting and upholding these rights within the law. Any
decision taken under these regulations will be made in accordance with the
University’s duties to secure and promote freedom of speech and academic freedom
within the law.

A1.2

Appeals: penalties, other than exclusion or expulsion, shall not be enforced against
a student until the 10 working day period of appeal has passed. In cases of
expulsion following an academic offence, the penalty shall not be enforced until
completion of the internal appeals procedures.

A1.3

Assessments: any assessment which contributes to a module mark or other
module requirement including invigilated assessments and class tests, coursework,
submissions by research students including the qualifying report and
thesis/portfolio. Misconduct in any assessment which does not contribute to a mark
for a module falls within the jurisdiction of the Executive Dean of the School
concerned.

A1.4

Board of Examiners
•

The Programme Board of Examiners of the University for a particular
programme as approved by the Senate on the recommendation of the relevant
School Education Committee.

•

It is intended as far as possible to separate the roles of the Board of Examiners
and the University Academic Misconduct Board, the former making academic
judgements and the latter deciding a penalty in cases of assessment
malpractice. The separation of functions is essential to ensure a student a fair
hearing.

•

Normally, the Board of Examiners will meet before the University Academic
Misconduct Board. In this case, when a case of alleged assessment

4

AU-UESEC-25-6663-A

2026/27

malpractice is pending, the Board of Examiners will assess the student's
performance in the module or part of the module concerned:
a

as if no offence had been committed and recommend;

b

alternative decisions according to whether or not the University Academic
Misconduct Board sets aside the result of the assessment, module or part
of the module.

•

The Board of Examiners normally will not publish the results of the student in
any part of the module(s) affected by alleged malpractice until the case has
been resolved. Results for modules unaffected by the alleged malpractice may
be published at the discretion of the Board. It may authorise its Chair to take
any necessary action, following the decision of the University Academic
Misconduct Board, Deputy Vice-Chancellor, or their nominee.

•

Where the Board of Examiners cannot meet prior to the University Academic
Misconduct Board, the decision of the University Academic Misconduct Board
shall remain confidential from the Board of Examiners and other academic
decision-making bodies until the Board of Examiners has reached an
academic judgement.

•

The student may not proceed to the next part of the programme until the Board
of Examiners has been satisfied that the penalties imposed by the University
Academic Misconduct Board have been complied with as well as the normal
academic requirements.

A1.5

Cases involving more than one student: where charges arise out of the same
incident, normally cases will be heard together.

A1.6

Executive Dean: refers to the Executive Dean of the School in which a student is
enrolled, or their nominee, or the person so designated by the Senate in the case of
a student enrolled on an inter-School programme. Nominees should normally be
the relevant School Associate Dean Education and Student Experience.

A1.7

Failure to attend: if a student does not attend a scheduled hearing and fails to
provide an explanation for their absence regarded as satisfactory by the Chair or
Officer, the hearing may take place in the student’s absence provided the Chair or
Officer is satisfied that notice of the hearing was properly served. The appropriate
penalties may be imposed in the student's absence. A student’s representative and
friend will not normally attend in their absence. The Chair and/or Officer may agree
to organise a virtual hearing.

A1.8

Failure to respond to a lesser charge: in the case of an offence committed in
Library Services for which the penalty is a fine (£200 or less); if a student fails to
respond (after reasonable attempts have been made) to a written charge from an
Authorised Officer (AO) , the penalty shall be applied. The student may appeal
against the penalty.

A1.9

Friend: students may be accompanied by one friend in addition to their
representative. The role of the friend is to provide moral support to the student if
desired. A friend is not expected to speak or take any formal part in disciplinary
proceedings. One friend may attend any meeting at which the student is present.
The name of the friend must be provided not less than three working days before
the date of any meetings, 5 working days before a meeting of the University

5

AU-UESEC-25-6663-A

2026/27

Academic Misconduct Board and 10 working days before a meeting of the University
Disciplinary Board or University Disciplinary Appeals Committee.
A1.10 The University will refer students to the Disclosure and Barring Service as required
by law when it considers that an individual has caused harm or poses a risk of harm
to a relevant vulnerable group.
A1.11 In-person meetings. It is expected that meetings described as ‘in person; are held
with all participants physically present. At the request of the student, and with the
agreement of the Chair, meetings may be held virtually. Meetings may also be held
virtually at the request of the Chair, in consultation with the student, if it is deemed
appropriate to prevent unnecessary delay or for other relevant practical reasons. A
hybrid approach may be taken where appropriate at the request of the Chair.
A1.12 Mitigation: evidence offered by a student to explain circumstances related to a
disciplinary case which may if relevant lessen the severity of the penalty.
A1.13 The following are some of the disciplinary Penalties in common use:
•

Exclusion is a penalty which temporarily prevents a student from attending
any class or classes and/or from any part of the University or its precincts for
a specified period of time. An order of exclusion may include a requirement
that the student should have no contact of any kind with a named person or
persons. The Authorised Officer (AO) or University Disciplinary Board will state
whether an excluded student may or may not be permitted to sit University
examinations and/or School tests. An excluded student remains subject to the
regulations of the University during the period of exclusion.

•

Expulsion is a penalty which requires a student to leave the University
permanently. It prevents the student from continuing with their programme of
study, attending any class or classes and from attending any part of the
University or its precincts and using its facilities.

•

Reprimand is a penalty which is notified in writing to the student and School
concerned. A reprimand (formal warning) will be recorded and may be
mentioned in references (see A1.17).

A1.14 Power of adjournment: any hearing may be adjourned, continued or postponed.
No case may normally be adjourned or postponed for a period of more than 10
working days.
A1.15 Staff: if a member of staff is involved advice should be sought from Human
Resources and Academic Services as it may be necessary to engage other
procedures such as the staff disciplinary or grievance procedure.
A1.16 Statements: Students attending a University Disciplinary Board will be provided
with a written statement of any account they give to the University Discipline Officer
as a formal part of the disciplinary process and will be asked either to (i) agree to (ii)
challenge the statement. Student attending a University Academic Misconduct
Board will be provided with a written summary of the evidence considered by the
Academic Offences Officer as a formal part of the disciplinary process and will be
asked to (i) agree to (ii) challenge the statement.
A1.17 Student Records and References
The following apply to any disciplinary penalty imposed under these Regulations:

6

AU-UESEC-25-6663-A

2026/27

•

All admissions and findings of guilt, together with penalties imposed shall be
notified to the Deputy Vice-Chancellor, or their nominee, and to the relevant
Executive Dean and/or person designated by Senate in the case of a
collaborative programme with a partner institution. Admissions and findings of
guilt shall be recorded on the student's University and School record. The
University will inform outside bodies such as accrediting bodies or partner
institutions, where relevant.

•

Admissions and findings of guilt with respect to disciplinary offences will
normally be mentioned in references where relevant. For University policy on
references please see the University intranet.

•

The period of document retention for all proceedings are set out in the relevant
University Disciplinary Board Procedures and the University Academic
Misconduct Board procedures.

A1.18 Student representative: students may be represented. Normally, this role is fulfilled
by a member of staff from the Students’ Union’s Advice Centre. A representative
has the right to speak to and question witnesses on the students’ behalf. One
representative may attend any meeting at which the student is present. The name
of the representative must be provided not less than three working days before the
date of any meetings, 5 working days before the date of a meeting of the University
Academic Misconduct Board and 10 working days before a meeting of the University
Disciplinary Board or University Disciplinary Appeals Committee.
A1.19 Support and guidance: the Authorised Officer, University Discipline Officer or
School Academic Offences Officer must advise the student at the earliest
opportunity of the availability of support and guidance from the Students’ Union
Advice Centre or their Personal Tutor. Students should be advised to make proper
use of digital security measures at all times. Whilst it is important that students
should retain all notes and other resources used in drafting assessments until marks
have been finally released, they should also be alerted to the danger of such
resources being copied without their knowledge, especially computer files stored on
hard disks or networks.
A1.20 Timescales: ‘days’ in these Regulations means working days i.e. not including
Saturdays, Sundays or bank holidays or days on which the University is closed.
Whilst the University will take all reasonable steps to comply with the timescales set
out in these Regulations, it reserves the right to vary them depending on the
circumstances of individual cases.
A1.21 University precincts: any location used for University activities. It includes the
premises of collaborative/partner colleges and of private venues while hosting Aston
events.
A1.22 University Presenter: person appointed to put the University’s case at hearings.

PART B STUDENT DISCIPLINE
B1

Disciplinary Offences

B1.1

These Regulations are intended to set and maintain acceptable standards of
behaviour within the University community, to encourage individuals to accept their

7

AU-UESEC-25-6663-A

2026/27

obligations to the community, to protect the rights of members of that community to
participate freely in the educational purposes of the University and to help maintain
the University’s good name and standing.
B1.2

The rules of discipline apply to all students registered with the University or
registered for a qualification of the University, irrespective of their mode or place of
study.

B1.3

These Regulations may also be adopted in the case of a former student who has
been reported in respect of an offence which might merit the exercise of Senate’s
powers described in Ordinance 2.6.2.3 to deprive persons of any Degrees or other
academic awards or distinctions awarded by the University.

B1.4

The following list gives examples of breaches of discipline; it does not prevent the
University considering and adjudicating on any other conduct or action which may
be a breach of discipline, whether on University premises or elsewhere. A student
may be deemed in breach of discipline who:

a

behaves in a violent, riotous, disorderly, grossly offensive or inappropriate way,
including disorderly or anti-social behaviour, such as smoking or vaping in any
enclosed area on University premises;

b

attempts to gain unfair advantage in any formal assessment, for example,
through plagiarism, collusion, or cheating;

c

records University staff or students without prior permission, including
contravention of the Policy for Students and Staff on the Recording of Lectures,
Webinars and Other Teaching Sessions

d

disrupts or improperly interferes with the academic, administrative, social or
other activities of the University or with the functions, duties or activities of any
student, member of staff or visitor;

e

contravenes the University’s policy on the prevention of harassment, to include
sexual harassment, sexual misconduct and hate crime (see further definitions
below);

f

assaults another person;

g

prevents the University from carrying out its due responsibilities;

h

willfully or negligently defaces, injures or harms the property of the University
or of an institution attended as part of a University course;

i

refuses to make good damage done in the University or elsewhere;

j

falsifies or misuses University records, including the submission of falsified
evidence of mitigation;

k

misuses or commits fraudulent activity with University I.D. cards, including at
University premises access barrier controls;

l

disregards any Ordinance, Regulation, or Code of Practice governing the
conduct or obligations of students in any part of the University;

8

AU-UESEC-25-6663-A

B1.5

2026/27

m

is convicted of an offence, accepts a police caution or other penalty imposed
by police such as a fine;

n

engages in conduct prejudicial to the good order, safety, operation and
discipline of the University, its students, staff and visitors;

o

commits fraud including identity and/or student finance fraud;

p

misuses, or uses in an unauthorised way, the University’s intellectual property
(including the sale of essays or other work produced by Aston University
students as part of their programme of study);

q

behaves in such a way as to bring the University into disrepute;

r

is enrolled on the basis of a fraudulent application.

Definitions of Harassment and Sexual Misconduct
Aston defines Harassment as:
Harassment includes unwanted behaviour or conduct which has the purpose or
effect of violating a person’s dignity or creating an intimidating, hostile,
degrading, humiliating or offensive environment because of, or connected to age, disability, gender reassignment, race, religion or belief, sex, or sexual
orientation. Aston University also defines harassment to include domestic
violence and abuse (which can also involve control, coercion and threats) and
stalking.
Aston also considers harassment to include any incidents of physical violence
towards another person(s) on the basis of a protected characteristic and hate
crimes, such as those criminal offences, which are perceived by the victim or
any other person to be motivated by hostility or prejudice, based on a person's
disability or perceived disability; race or perceived race; or religion or perceived
religion; or sexual orientation or perceived sexual orientation or transgender
identity or perceived transgender identity.
Aston defines Sexual Misconduct as:
Sexual misconduct’ means any unwanted or attempted unwanted conduct of a
sexual nature through any medium, including online, and includes but is not
limited to:
•
•
•
•
•

Sexual harassment (as defined by Section 26 (2) of the Equality Act
2010)
Unwanted conduct which creates an intimidating, hostile, degrading,
humiliating or offensive environment (as defined by the Equality Act
2010)
Sexual assault (as defined by the Sexual Offences Act 2003)
Rape (as defined by the Sexual Offences Act 2003)
Physical unwanted sexual advances (as set out by the Equality and
Human Rights Commission: Sexual harassment and the law, 2017)
9

AU-UESEC-25-6663-A
•
•

2026/27

Intimidation, or promising resources or benefits in return for sexual
favours (as set out by the Equality and Human Rights Commission:
Sexual harassment and the law, 2017)
Distributing private and personal explicit images or video footage of an
individual without their consent (as defined by the Criminal Justice and
Courts Act 2015).

Though these terms are not exclusive.
B2

Criminal Offences

B2.1

Where the University considers it possible that a criminal offence has been
committed it may, after taking any advice necessary, refer the case(s) to the police.

B2.2

Where a matter has been referred to the police the University will usually stay any
internal charging processes until the outcome of criminal proceedings,

B2.3

The University Discipline Officer may proceed with the initial investigation of the
offence before either a prosecution has been completed or a decision not to
prosecute has been taken, dependent on the nature / severity of the case to allow
risk assessment, precautionary and safety measures to be evaluated and
implemented, as required.

B2.4

Where the University considers it possible that a criminal offence has been
committed and where the consequences of finding the accused guilty using the test
of the balance of probabilities would have serious repercussions for the accused’s
future career prospects and reputation, the University may decide that it is not
competent to hear the case.

B2.5

Where a student has been charged by the University with possession of a criminal
conviction, the charge brought by the University under these disciplinary regulations
cannot be denied because the court has already passed sentence on a guilty finding
or admitted offence against the criminal law. If a student accepts a police caution,
formal police warning or other resolution, the student has admitted their involvement
in the criminal offence to which the caution or warning relates. In these instances,
the student will not be required to admit or deny the University’s charge, nor present
a defence. The role of the Disciplinary Board will be to determine whether there
should be a University penalty and, if so, what that penalty should be. Before a
penalty is determined, the student will be provided with the opportunity to present
mitigation.

B2.6

Where a student has received a custodial sentence for a criminal conviction, and
has been referred to the University Disciplinary Board the following principles will
apply and the relevant Sections of the Regulations on Student Discipline will be
interpreted, or not applied, accordingly:
a

The student will be advised that a hearing is taking place rather than being
invited to attend the hearing.

b

The student will be permitted to nominate a representative to attend the
hearing on their behalf even though they will not also be present. If a nominee
is identified, the student must give consent for the details of the case to be
shared with the nominee. The Regulations concerning attendance at the
hearing and the University Disciplinary Board’s authority to proceed in the

10

AU-UESEC-25-6663-A

2026/27

student’s absence will apply equally to any representative nominated by the
student.

B3

B4

c

If the student, or their nominated representative, fails to respond to
correspondence about the disciplinary hearing without good reason, a
University Disciplinary Board shall be arranged and may proceed to impose
whatever penalty it thinks fit in accordance with the Regulations.

d

Since the charge brought by the University cannot be denied, the court having
already passed sentence on a guilty finding, admitted offence or similar against
the criminal law, the student will not be required to admit or deny the
University’s charge, nor present a defence.

e

Students will be given the opportunity to submit mitigation in writing in advance
of the University Disciplinary Board hearing and these may be circulated with
the agenda papers. This does not preclude additional mitigation being
presented on the day of the hearing.

f

The role of the University Disciplinary Board will be to determine whether there
should be a University penalty and, if so, what that penalty should be.

g

Students will be advised of the University Disciplinary Board’s decision and of
their right of appeal (procedures for which are set out in Section D of the
Regulations on Student Discipline) in writing.

Precautionary Exclusion
B3.1

The Vice-Chancellor, Deputy Vice Chancellor or their nominee may exclude
a student from any class or classes and/or from all or any part of the
University at any time, and may direct that such exclusion shall continue
until the determination of any criminal proceedings and/or any disciplinary
action by the University.

B3.2

Students shall be given the opportunity to explain their conduct to the
relevant Authorised Officer at the earliest possible opportunity.

B3.3

The student may be informed orally of the decision to exclude them. Written
confirmation and notice of the right of appeal shall be provided within two
working days.

B3.4

Following exclusion the student may contact the Advice Centre via phone
or email to arrange virtual support meetings. The Advice Centre will inform
the Deputy Vice-Chancellor or their nominee in advance of all visits by
excluded students.

B3.5

The Deputy Vice-Chancellor or their nominee shall report all exclusions to
the next meeting of the Senate. In cases where the matter has not been
considered by the Senate Disciplinary Appeals Committee, the Senate shall
determine whether the exclusion shall continue until the outcome of any
appeal. There is no right for the student to make representations to the
Senate, whether in writing or in person.

Role and Powers of Authorised Officers (non-academic offences)

11

AU-UESEC-25-6663-A
B4.1

2026/27

Authorised Officers (AO) are authorised to deal in the first instance with offences
other than Academic Offences. The following are Authorised Officers:
a

The Vice-Chancellor.

b

The Deputy Vice-Chancellor or their nominee.

c

The person designated by the Senate in the case of a collaborative programme
with a partner institution.

d

The Director of Information Services, or any nominated member of their Senior
Management Team.

e

The Head of Library & Learning Services,

f

and any other officer whom the Senate may from time to time authorise.

B4.2

If the Authorised Officer is a co-student of the student concerned, this should be
disclosed to the University Discipline Officer so that an alternative Authorised Officer
may be nominated.

B4.3

An Authorised Officer may deal with alleged offences providing that the student
admits all charges against them and agrees to have their case dealt with by the
Authorised Officer. In cases where guilt is denied by the student, or where the
student has elected to have their case heard by the University Disciplinary Board,
the case is referred to the University Disciplinary Board through the University
Discipline Officer (see also A1.8 ‘Failure to respond to a lesser charge’).

B4.4

The Authorised Officer has absolute discretion to impose one or more of the
following penalties in addition to any conditions which may be set out in other
Ordinances, University Regulations or Codes:
The Vice-Chancellor, Deputy Vice Chancellor or their nominee:
power to exclude from any class or classes and/or from any area of the University
for a specified period, to administer a reprimand (formal warning), to impose a fine
not exceeding £300, and to require restitution in whole or in part for damage.
The Director of Information Services or any nominated member of their
Senior Management Team:
power to exclude from any area of the Library and to exclude from use of any library
facilities for a specified period, to administer a reprimand (formal warning), to impose
a fine not exceeding £200, and to require restitution in whole or in part for damage.
The Head of Library & Learning Services:
power to exclude from any area of the Library and to exclude from use of any Library
facilities for a specified period, to administer a reprimand (formal warning), to impose
a fine not exceeding £200, and to require restitution in whole or in part for damage.

B4.5

If the Authorised Officer judges the alleged offence to be of such gravity that it should
be considered by the University Disciplinary Board in the first instance or, if they are
not satisfied that the penalties at their disposal are appropriate for the offence, they
must report this to the University Discipline Officer so that the case may be referred
to the University Disciplinary Board.

12

AU-UESEC-25-6663-A

2026/27

B4.6

The Authorised Officer can refer an alleged offence to the University Disciplinary
Board at any stage in the disciplinary process, for example, if new information
becomes available.

B5

Process for Consideration of Allegations of Breaches of Discipline (nonAcademic Offences)

B5.1

Any apparent (non-academic) breach of discipline, must be reported to the
University Discipline Officer. Panel membership for allegations of breaches of
Regulation B1.5 (harassment and sexual misconduct) will be drawn only from staff
who have received the relevant training.

B5.2

The University Discipline Officer will, where necessary, investigate such allegations,
and may interview and take written statements from those concerned and
witnesses, including students and staff.

B5.3

If the University Discipline Officer is satisfied that there is no case to answer, those
involved will be informed accordingly. If appropriate an informal warning may be
given.

B5.4

If the University Discipline Officer is satisfied that there is a case to answer, they
shall frame the wording of the precise charge/s to be answered by the student and
will inform the student in writing. The student will be requested to admit or deny the
charge/s in writing and, if admitting the charge/s, will be requested to confirm
whether they wish the case to be dealt with by an Authorised Officer, rather than a
University Disciplinary Board.

B5.5

The University Discipline Officer shall prepare a report of their findings and refer the
matter either to the appropriate Authorised Officer (if the student admits the charge/s
and wishes to have the case dealt with by an Authorised Officer), or to the
appropriate University Board (if the student denies the charge/s or admits them, but
wishes to have the case dealt with by the University Disciplinary Board).

B5.6

The student will be offered the opportunity to meet with the Authorised Officer (AO).
In appropriate circumstances (e.g. to avoid holding two separate hearings) the AO
may be accompanied at the meeting, including by not more than one other AO. An
Authorised Officer must establish that the student admits the charge and has not
elected to have the matter dealt with by the University Disciplinary Board. The
student is required to confirm these details in writing. If the student denies the charge
the matter will be referred to the University Disciplinary Board. A student is entitled
to at least 24 hours’ notice of an interview.

B5.7

The Authorised Officer shall take into account any mitigation raised by the student,
together with documentary evidence, where this can be provided (e.g. medical
evidence, bank statements, etc.).

B5.8

The Authorised Officer will decide upon a penalty, taking into account the degree of
premeditation, whether the offence was repeated or continuous, the extent of the
impact upon staff, students, the environment or the standing of the University and
the previous disciplinary record of the student whether or not the offence occurred
on University premises and regardless of whether the student was a member of the
University at the time.

B5.9

Penalties other than reparation for damage and injury to property can be suspended,
conditional on the good behaviour of the student, for a maximum of one year.
13

AU-UESEC-25-6663-A

2026/27

B5.10 If the penalty of exclusion is imposed, the exercise of this power must be reported
through the Deputy Vice-Chancellor or their nominee to the next meeting of the
Senate. The student shall have a right of appeal against such exclusion to the
Senate Disciplinary Appeals Committee, whose decision shall be final.
B5.11 A student who can evidence allowed grounds for appeal as set out in D2 may submit
an appeal to the University Disciplinary Board in mitigation of penalties, other than
exclusion, imposed by the Authorised Officer. If the student wishes to make such an
appeal, this must be done in writing to the University Discipline Officer within 10
working days of the penalty being notified to the student.
B5.12 Penalties, apart from exclusion and expulsion, shall not be imposed until the 10
working day period for appeal has expired. If an appeal is to be made, the penalty,
apart from that of exclusion, shall be suspended until the appeal has been resolved
by the University Disciplinary Board Chair or by the Senate Disciplinary Appeals
Committee.
B5.13 All admissions and findings of guilt, together with penalties imposed shall be notified
by the Authorised Officer to the Deputy Vice-Chancellor or their nominee, and to the
relevant Executive Dean and/or person designated by Senate in the case of a
collaborative programme with a partner institution. Admissions and findings of guilt
shall be recorded on the student's University and School record. The University will
inform outside bodies such as accrediting bodies or partner institutions, where
relevant. Students who are covered by the General Regulations on Fitness to
Practise may be referred to the appropriate Fitness to Practise Officer.
B6

Process for Consideration of Allegations of Breaches of Assessment
Regulations

B6.1

It is the responsibility of invigilators and assessors to refer cases of alleged
assessment malpractice to the University Discipline Officer.

B6.2

The University Discipline Officer will obtain a written report from the staff involved in
the alleged incident, may interview the student and other witnesses and take written
statements, and will decide if there is a case to answer.

B6.3

The University Discipline Officer may come to one of the following decisions:
a there is not a case to answer and those concerned will be advised
accordingly
b that on the balance of probability there is not a case to answer but determines
that it is appropriate to give an informal warning
c that on the balance of probability, there is a case to answer

B6.4

If the University Discipline Officer is satisfied that there is a case to answer, the
following steps will be taken:
a

the team responsible for recording marks and/or Associate Deans (or their
nominees) will be informed that a case is pending, including the name of the
student concerned, and the module in which the alleged incident took place;

b

for breaches of the Fixed-Time Assessment Regulations for Candidates, e.g.
bringing unauthorised material (such as notes) into an assessment room or
refusing to stop writing when asked, the matter will be referred to the Deputy

14

AU-UESEC-25-6663-A

2026/27

Vice-Chancellor or their nominee, in their role as the relevant Authorised
Officer.
c

cases which are deemed to require academic judgement will be referred to
the University Disciplinary Board.

B6.5

The Deputy Vice-Chancellor, or their nominee, will deal with matters referred to them
in accordance with the process set out in B5 above. In the case of breaches of
Fixed-Time Assessment Regulations for Candidates the Deputy Vice-Chancellor or
their nominee, will use the Tariff of Penalties to assist in identifying the severity of
the offence and the appropriate penalty.

B6.6

In a case of alleged malpractice where the assessment is taking place off-campus
the local organiser and invigilator of the assessment should investigate the incident
and report to the University Discipline Officer. The student concerned should also
prepare a statement and submit this to the University Discipline Officer.

PART C ACADEMIC MATTERS
C1

Definitions

C1.1

Academic or intellectual malpractice shall be established on the basis of academic
judgement.

C1.2

Academic offences include:
a Allowing someone to impersonate a student for the purposes of assessment
attendance – where a student allows someone to attend an assessment in lieu
of their own attendance with the intention of impersonation and/or to falsely
represent the attending student’s work as being their own. (Where this applies
see Regulation C1.5 below.)
b Cheating - any academic or intellectual malpractice normally in assessments
such as fixed-time assessments, fixed-window assessments or coursework
which may give an unfair advantage over others. Taking unauthorised material
into an assessment (including revision notes or unauthorised equipment) shall
be regarded as a breach of Fixed-Time Assessment Regulations for Candidates
and dealt with by the Deputy Vice-Chancellor or their nominee, as detailed in B6.
c

Collusion - where two or more people have worked together without permission
to produce a piece of work which is then submitted for assessment as the work
of only one person, which may give an unfair advantage over others. Action may
be taken against a student who has allowed their work to be used as well as
against a student who submits work resulting from collusion. Collusion can occur
in fixed-window and coursework assessments, as well as online fixed-time
assessments.

d Contracting/purchasing – where a student contracts or purchases from someone
else, a piece of written work and submits it as their own original piece of written
work. There does not have to be a financial transaction involved. (Where this
applies see Regulation C1.5 below.)

15

AU-UESEC-25-6663-A

2026/27

e Copying another student’s work – where a student copies another student’s
work, with or without the other student’s knowledge, and submits it for
assessment as their own work. Action may be taken against a student who has
allowed their work to be copied as well as against a student who submits work
resulting from copying.
f

Impersonating a student for the purposes of assessment attendance – where a
student attends an assessment on behalf of another student with the intention of
falsely representing their own work as having been produced by the
impersonated person. (Where this applies see Regulation C1.5 below.)

g Falsification of data or other research – where a student deliberately falsifies or
fabricates results in order to support a thesis or argument.
h Plagiarism – where a student uses, without appropriate acknowledgement, the
work of other people and presents it as their own which may give an unfair
advantage over others. Intentional and unintentional acts of plagiarism will be
construed as offences.
i

Misusing Artificial Intelligence (AI) tools – In an assessment where the use of
Artificial Intelligence (AI) tools is not permitted, or permitted in only a specific
manner as outlined in the relevant assessment brief, a student uses one or more
AI tools to generate assessment content which is then submitted as their own
original work. AI tools can include Chatbots used to generate text or AI tools
used to generate images.

C1.3

The University recognises that a distinction should be made between (i) plagiarism
and cheating and (ii) poor academic practice. The University considers judgements
made regarding this distinction in relation to particular pieces of student work to be
a matter of academic judgement. Poor academic practice will be addressed through
the assessment of the work and will not result in disciplinary proceedings being
brought against a student.

C1.4

Where appropriate, if the student admits the charge and accepts the School’s
jurisdiction in this area or does not engage with the Stage 1 process, an academic
malpractice in assessments should be dealt with by the appropriate School
Academic Offences Officer using the University Tariff of Penalties. A student who
denies the alleged Academic Offence or who chooses to have their case dealt with
by the University Academic Misconduct Board following a charge from the School
Academic Offences Officer is subject to the procedures of the Board.

C1.5

In cases where it is suspected that a student has conspired to create or has
contracted or purchased from someone else a piece of written work as defined
above, or has impersonated or allowed themselves to be impersonated for the
purposes of deception, it should be noted that this type of offence will, on completion
of stage one of the disciplinary process, be referred to a University Academic
Misconduct Board and the recommended penalty will normally be that of expulsion
from the University. This may also be referred to the police as a criminal matter.

C1.6

It is the responsibility of members of staff to refer cases of suspected academic
offences to the Academic Offences Officer of the School in which the student is
16

AU-UESEC-25-6663-A

2026/27

enrolled, or the person designated by the Senate in the case of a student enrolled
on an inter-School, or collaborative programme. As part of this referral all supporting
evidence should be provided to the Academic Offences Officer to enable a thorough
investigation to take place.
C2

Process for the Consideration of Allegations of Academic Offences, and the
Role and Powers of the Academic Offences Officer

C2.1

The Academic Offences Officer will be the relevant Associate Dean Education and
Student Experience or other delegated member(s) of staff within the School in which
a student is enrolled. In a case where the student is studying a module owned by a
different School to that in which the student is enrolled, the investigation for
plagiarism will be undertaken by the Academic Offences Officer in the School that
owns that specific module. The investigating School will keep the appropriate
Associate Dean Education and Student Experience of the home School of the
student informed as to progress of the investigation. Where a student is enrolled on
a collaborative programme, the investigation will be carried out by the person so
designated by Senate.

C2.2

The Academic Offences Officer can refer an alleged offence to the University
Academic Misconduct Board at any time after completion of stage one of the
disciplinary process.

C2.3

In the case of a collaborative programme with a partner institution the Academic
Offences Officer in the School in which the alleged offence occurs will report
preliminary findings to the Academic Offences Officer in the School in which the
student is enrolled and/or the person designated by the Senate (where necessary).

C2.4

The Academic Offences Officer will investigate all referred allegations of Academic
Offences. Every effort should be made to deal with cases of suspected Academic
Offences as soon as possible. Investigations will normally be carried out in five
working days but may take longer depending on the circumstances of the case. The
process for the investigation of Academic Offences is included as an appendices to
these regulations.

C2.5

If, following their initial investigation, the Academic Offences Officer is satisfied there
is a case to answer, they may:
a

convene a two-stage hearing, or

b

refer the matter to the Secretary of the University Academic Misconduct Board
where any of the statements in C2.12c apply.

C2.6 Where cases are dealt with by the Academic Offences Officer, a two-stage hearing
will be convened. Any student whose case is to be heard by the Academic Offences
Officer shall be contacted in writing, inviting them to attend and confirming:
a

the date of hearing (the student will be informed not less than five working
days before the hearing date)

b

who will be present

c

the academic offence of which the student is suspected

d

their access to advice and support from the Advice Centre

17

AU-UESEC-25-6663-A

2026/27

The student will also be provided a copy of the Regulations on Student Discipline,
the Tariff of Penalties for Academic Offences and a copy of any written material the
Academic Offences Officer intends to present at the hearing. Written material in
cases of alleged plagiarism would usually be expected to comprise of marked up
original source documents in addition to the text matching software report.
C2.7

The student concerned is expected to attend the hearing in person. If a student fails
to respond to the hearing invitation (after reasonable attempts have been made) the
Academic Offences Officer may either convene the hearing in the student’s absence,
or refer the matter to the Secretary of the University Academic Misconduct Board.
The student shall have the right to make written representations to the Academic
Offences Officer provided that they submit any written material not less than two
working days before the date of the hearing. The student may be accompanied by a
representative, as defined in Section A1.18 of these regulations.

C2.8 The Academic Offences Officer will normally be accompanied by one other member
of staff whose responsibility it is to take notes of the hearing. It may be appropriate to
invite other member(s) of staff in some cases.
C2.9 In the first stage of the hearing, the Academic Offences Officer has the right to
interview and take statements from those concerned, including students and staff.
They may also consider representations made by the student or their representative,
in order to determine whether an academic offence has been committed. The student
or their representative may also present any exceptional or mitigating factors that are
of relevance to the case.
C2.10 The Academic Offences Officer has the right to request an exceptional viva voce
examination in cases where it is suspected that a student has contracted and/or
purchased material for written assignments including project and dissertation work.
The viva voce should be conducted by a subject specialist in the presence of the
Academic Offences Officer; the aim of the viva voce should be to test the student’s
knowledge of the piece of work under investigation. The evidence from this
exceptional viva voce may be used in any following disciplinary action.
C2.11 At the end of the first stage of the hearing, the student and any person(s) representing
and/or accompanying them shall be asked to withdraw whilst the Academic Offences
Officer makes their decision.
C2.12 The Academic Offences Officer may come to one of the following decisions:

a

If the Academic Offences Officer is satisfied there is not a case to answer
those concerned will be advised accordingly.

b

If the Academic Offences Officer identifies anything in an assessment which
suggests a student may be in danger of committing a future offence an
informal warning will be given.

c

If the Academic Offences Officer is satisfied an academic offence has been
committed, the student and their representative will be invited back into the

18

AU-UESEC-25-6663-A

2026/27

hearing, and the second stage will begin unless one or more of the following
statements are true:

d

i.

The offence constitutes a repeat offence, or a second offence the
Academic Offences Officer does not feel able or appropriate to
investigate

ii.

The offence is of Severity Level 4 in the University’s Tariff of Penalties

iii.

The offence relates to assessment submitted as part of a PhD or
Professional Doctorate Programme

iv.

The penalties at their disposal in the University Tariff of Penalties do
not appear to be appropriate for the offence e.g. a new type of offence
on which guidance is required.

If the Academic Offences Officer feels they require more time to consider the
case, the hearing may be adjourned for a period of no more than five working
days, and the student invited to the second stage of the hearing process if
required.

C2.13 At the second stage of the hearing, the Academic Offences Officer will read out the
charge to the student, and the student will be asked to confirm whether they plead
guilty to the charge and whether they accept the jurisdiction of the Academic Offences
Officer in dealing with the case. The student may request more time to consider the
charge and their plea, in which case the hearing will be adjourned and reconvened
normally no more than 5 working days following the initial hearing. If a students does
not engage with the hearing process the Academic Offences Officer will charge the
student in writing and the student will have the opportunity to reject the jurisdiction of
the Academic Offences Officer by responding to the charge letter within 10 working
days.
C.2.14 After a guilty plea has been heard the student and any person(s) representing and/or
accompanying them shall withdraw while the Academic Offences Officer considers
the penalty.
C2.15 When the Academic Offences Officer has decided upon a penalty, the student and
any person(s) representing and/or accompanying them shall be invited back into the
hearing to hear the decision and be informed of the student’s right to appeal against
the penalty within 10 working days. All penalties will be applied if, after 10 working
days have passed, no appeal has been received. Any such appeal must be in writing
and give brief reasons for the grounds of the appeal. If the grounds for appeal are
determined by the University Discipline Officer to be valid, the University Discipline
Officer will either arrange for the School to review the case or arrange for the
University Academic Misconduct Board to meet to hear the appeal.
C2.16 The student will be issued a charge letter to formally accept or deny the charge.
C2.17 Following a guilty plea, the Academic Offences Officer shall take into account any
mitigation raised by the student, together with documentary evidence, where this can
19

AU-UESEC-25-6663-A

2026/27

be provided (e.g., medical evidence). The Academic Offences Officer or other
members of staff attending the hearing (where appropriate) may seek clarification
from the student or any person representing them.

C2.18 The penalties available to the Academic Offences Officer shall be in accordance with
the Tariff of Penalties for Academic Offences.
C2.19 A record of the proceedings and the decisions reached shall be retained by the
School in which the meeting with the Academic Offences Officer was convened.

PART D UNIVERSITY DISCIPLINARY BOARD
D1

Cases referred to the University Disciplinary Board

D1.1

A student whose case is to be heard by the University Disciplinary Board shall be
sent a written summons by the Secretary to appear before the University
Disciplinary Board at least 10 working days before the date of the hearing. The
student will be given notice of the charge, of the right to representation, the date and
time of the hearing and the procedure to be followed by the University Disciplinary
Board.

D1.2

At a hearing the student shall be entitled to hear all the evidence of the complaint
and to state their own case. The case against the student shall be presented first.
Both parties shall have the right to call and to question witnesses and to make a
concluding statement, that of the student being heard last.

D1.3

At the hearing, the University's case normally will be put by the University Presenter.
Penalties for Non-Academic Offences

D1.4

The University Disciplinary Board, if satisfied that an offence has been committed,
may impose one or more of the following penalties for disciplinary offences and
academic offences of severity level four.
a

a reprimand (formal warning);

b

a fine not exceeding £500;

c

requirement to make good in whole or in part to the satisfaction of the
University Disciplinary Board any damage or injury caused to property in the
University or elsewhere;

d

requirement to repay in whole or in part any monies obtained by fraud;

e

in the case of a student who has been enrolled on a programme/module on
the basis of a fraudulent application, any awards and/or academic credits
gained on that programme/module will be withdrawn. This penalty will be
applied consistently to all students in this situation.

f

in cases where a student has allowed themselves to be impersonated for the
purposes of deception, the recommended penalty will normally be that of
expulsion from the University (see Regulation C1.5);
20

AU-UESEC-25-6663-A

2026/27

g

in the case of abuse of any of the University services or facilities,
disqualification from using such services or facilities for a specified period;

h

the University Disciplinary Board may specify that the student not have contact
with named person(s). The University Disciplinary Board will determine the
penalty to be imposed if the student breaches this penalty;

i

exclusion from membership of and attendance at the University for a
specified period. The University Disciplinary Board will state whether an
excluded student may or may not be permitted to sit University examinations
and/or School tests;

j

expulsion from the University.

D1.5

Penalties other than reparation for damage and injury to property or setting aside
academic work can be suspended, conditional on the good behaviour of the student,
for a specified period.

D1.6

When determining penalties, the University Disciplinary Board shall take into
account any material mitigation submitted by the student. Where the University
Disciplinary Board concludes that these circumstances are relevant to the case, this
shall normally be taken into account when assessing the severity of the offence. In
deciding if circumstances should be taken into account, the University Disciplinary
Board shall consider whether those circumstances have previously been disclosed
in a timely manner.

D1.7

When a student has been excluded, the University Disciplinary Board may make
specific requirements that the student has to meet before being allowed to re-enrol
and return to study.

D1.8

At the University Disciplinary Board’s discretion, it may proceed to deal with cases
and, if necessary, make decisions in the student's absence even if the student has
voluntarily withdrawn from the University, so long as they were a registered student
at the point that the charge was formally notified to the student.

D1.9

Should a student breach a penalty imposed by the University Disciplinary Board, the
University Disciplinary Board may be reconvened.

D1.10 A record of the proceedings of any University Disciplinary Board shall be kept by the
Secretary. The student shall be informed in writing of the decision and the reasons
for the decision of the University Disciplinary Board as soon as practicable after its
meeting, usually within 10working days.

PART E UNIVERSITY ACADEMIC MISCONDUCT BOARD
E1

Cases referred to the University Academic Misconduct Board

E1.1 A student whose case is to be heard by the University Academic Misconduct Board
shall be sent a written summons by the Secretary to appear before the University
Academic Misconduct Board at least 10 working days before the date of the hearing.
The student will be given notice of the charge, of the right to representation, the date
and time of the hearing and the procedure to be followed by the University Academic
Misconduct Board.

21

AU-UESEC-25-6663-A

2026/27

E1.2 At a hearing the student shall be entitled to hear all the evidence in support of the
charge and to state their own case. The case against the student shall be presented
first. Both parties shall have the right to make a concluding statement, that of the
student being heard last.
E1.3 At the hearing, the University's case will be put by the University Presenter, normally
the Academic Offences Officer who conducted the initial investigation.
Penalties for Severity 4 Academic Offences
E1.4 The University Academic Misconduct Board, if satisfied that an offence has been
committed, may impose one or more of the following penalties for academic offences
of severity level four.
a

set aside the whole module, qualifying report or thesis, i.e. the outcome or
recorded mark for that module, qualifying report or thesis to be fail or zero;

b

in cases where a student has conspired to create or has contracted or
purchased from someone else a piece of written work or has impersonated or
allowed themselves to be impersonated for the purposes of deception, the
recommended penalty will normally be that of expulsion from the University
(see Regulation C1.5);

c

expulsion from the University.

E1.5 For academic offences of less than severity level 4 the University Tariff of Penalties
shall apply.
E1.6 The penalty of expulsion will usually be suspended until completion of the internal
appeals procedures. Internal appeal procedures are considered complete when one
of the following conditions is met:
i.
ii.
iii.

The student does not submit an appeal by the notified appeal deadline
The student submits an appeal by the notified appeal deadline, but this appeal
is not considered to have grounds
the student submits an appeal by the notified appeal deadline, the appeal is
considered to have grounds and the student is notified of the outcome of the
Senate Disciplinary Appeals Committee

The student may continue to attend the University as normal during this period
This does not prevent the University Academic Misconduct Board from applying a
suspension to the penalty as outlined in D1.5
E1.7 When determining penalties, the University Academic Misconduct Board shall take
into account any material mitigation submitted by the student. Where the University
Academic Misconduct Board concludes that these circumstances are relevant to the
case, this shall normally be taken into account when assessing the severity of the
offence. In deciding if circumstances should be taken into account, the University
Academic Misconduct Board shall consider whether those circumstances have
previously been disclosed in a timely manner. The University Academic Misconduct
Board is unlikely to accept mitigation when considering a repeat offence of (i)
plagiarism, (ii) collusion or (iii) cheating.
E1.8 At the University Academic Misconduct Board’s discretion, it may proceed to deal
with cases and, if necessary, make decisions in the student's absence even if the

22

AU-UESEC-25-6663-A

2026/27

student has voluntarily withdrawn from the University, so long as they were a
registered student at the point of formal notification of the charge
E1.9 A record of the proceedings of any University Academic Misconduct Board shall be
kept by the Secretary. The student shall be informed in writing of the decision and
the reasons for the decision of the University Academic Misconduct Board as soon
as practicable after its meeting, usually within seven working days.

PART F RIGHT OF APPEAL
F1

Appeal against the decision of the Authorised Officer or Academic Offences
Officer

F1.1 The grounds for appeal are:
a

procedural irregularity of a material nature, including the commission of an
error during the disciplinary hearing;

b

new evidence material to the case which the student can demonstrate was for
good reason not previously available.

F1.2 A student who has admitted an offence may only appeal in mitigation of the penalty.
F1.3 Appeals against the decision of the Authorised Officer or the Academic Offences
Officer
F1.3.1

A student who wishes to appeal against the decision of the Authorised
Officer, or the Academic Offences Officer must give notice in writing of
the grounds for appeal including a summary of their case, to the
University Discipline Officer within 10 working days of the decision being
notified. The University Discipline Officer will determine whether there are
grounds for appeal. If valid grounds for appeal are identified for
consideration the appeal against the decision of the Authorised Officer
will be heard by a University Disciplinary Board Chair. Appeals against
the decision of the Academic Offences Officer may be heard by a
University Academic Misconduct Board Chair.

F1.3.2

The student will receive these Regulations and the detailed procedures
of appeals to the University Disciplinary Board or Academic Misconduct
Board as appropriate.

F1.3.3

The University Disciplinary Board Chair or University Academic
Misconduct Chair may accept or reject the appeal in whole or in part.

F1.3.4

The University Disciplinary Board Chair or University Academic
Misconduct Board Chair may set aside, vary (including increasing or
decreasing the severity of the original penalties) or confirm the penalty
imposed by the Authorised Officer or Academic Offences Officer, and in
doing so, may take into account any record of previous misconduct,
whether or not occurring on University premises and regardless of
whether the student was a member of the University at the time, the
penalties available to the University Disciplinary Board Chair or

23

AU-UESEC-25-6663-A

2026/27

University Academic Misconduct Board Chair being those set out in
Regulations D1.4 and E1.4 respectively
F1.3.5

F2

The decision of the University Disciplinary Board or University Academic
Misconduct Board shall be final, and no further appeal shall be permitted
within the University

The Senate Disciplinary Appeals Committee for cases heard initially by a
University Disciplinary Board or a University Academic Misconduct Board

F2.1 The grounds for appeal are:
a

procedural irregularity of a material nature, including the commission of an
error during the disciplinary hearing;

b

new evidence material to the case which the student can demonstrate was for
good reason not previously available.

F2.2 A student who wishes to appeal against precautionary exclusion or the decision of
the University Disciplinary Board or University Academic Misconduct Board must give
notice in writing including a summary of the grounds on which the appeal is made, to
the Secretary of the Senate Disciplinary Appeals Committee within 10 working days
of the decision being notified.
F2.3 A Senate Disciplinary Appeals Committee shall be appointed by the Senate to
consider appeals made against precautionary exclusion or decisions of the University
Disciplinary Board or University Academic Misconduct Board.
F2.4 The composition of a Senate Disciplinary Appeals Committee shall be:
i.
ii.
iii.
iv.

Vice-Chancellor or nominee (Chair)
Two members of Senate
A representative of the Sabbatical Officers of the Aston Students’ Union
Deputy Vice-Chancellor or nominee (Secretary)

No person who was a member of or was concerned in any way with earlier
proceedings will be a member of the Senate Disciplinary Appeals Committee.
F2.5 The Senate Disciplinary Appeals Committee shall have the following Terms of
Reference:

F3

a

to consider appeals against precautionary exclusion or the decision of a
University Disciplinary Board or University Academic Misconduct Board;

b

to accept or reject the appeal in whole or in part;

c

to set aside, vary or confirm a decision of precautionary exclusion, of the
University Disciplinary Board or University Academic Misconduct Board, and
in so doing may take into account any record of previous misconduct;

d

to report its decisions to the Senate.

Procedures of the Senate Disciplinary Appeals Committee

F3.1 The Secretary and Chair of the Senate Disciplinary Appeals Committee will consider
the student’s submission to ensure that an appeal does not progress to the full

24

AU-UESEC-25-6663-A

2026/27

hearing of the Senate Disciplinary Appeals Committee if they consider that the
student has no prospect of success whatsoever. This should be based on their
general impression of the claims made and the benefit of any doubt should be given
to the student. The student will be informed in writing if there are no appropriate
grounds to initiate the appeals process.
F3.2 Not less than 15 working days before a meeting of the Senate Disciplinary Appeals
Committee, the Committee Secretary shall be sent a written summons to appear
before the hearing. The student should be notified of any detailed procedures of the
Senate Disciplinary Appeals Committee which do not appear in these Regulations.
F3.3 A copy of the minutes of the University Disciplinary Board or University Academic
Misconduct Board shall be made available to the appellant in advance of the hearing.
The Chair of the University Disciplinary Board or University Academic Misconduct
Board may prepare their own report to the Senate Disciplinary Appeals Committee,
which shall also be submitted to the student in advance of the hearing.
F3.4 The student shall have the right to submit a written statement outlining the grounds
for appeal and including any documentary evidence (e.g. medical certificates). Where
witnesses are to be presented a written witness statement must be submitted in
advance.
F3.5 All documentary evidence from the University and the student must be submitted to
the Secretary of the Senate Disciplinary Appeals Committee at least 10 working
days before the date of the hearing.
F3.6 The University Presenter may call or present further evidence to meet any new or
additional issues raised by the appellant.
F3.7 In order to facilitate its investigations, the Senate Disciplinary Appeals Committee
shall have access to relevant material evidence (including the minutes and papers of
the University Disciplinary Board or University Academic Misconduct Board). In
addition, it may require the attendance of witnesses. The Chair of the University
Disciplinary Board or University Academic Misconduct Board shall be in attendance
but may speak only when requested by the Chair of the Senate Disciplinary Appeals
Committee.
F3.8 At conclusion of the proceedings all non-members of the Committee will be asked
to withdraw while the Senate Disciplinary Appeals Committee reaches its decision.
The Senate Disciplinary Appeals Committee shall have the power to make one of
the following decisions on behalf of the Senate:
a

to accept or reject the appeal in whole or in part;

b

to set aside, vary or confirm the finding of guilt in whole or in part;

c

to set aside, vary or confirm a precautionary exclusion;

d

to set aside, vary (including increasing or decreasing the severity of the original
penalties) or confirm the penalty imposed, and in doing so, may take into
account any record of previous misconduct, whether or not occurring on
University premises and regardless of whether the student was a member of
the University at the time, the penalties available to the Senate Disciplinary
Appeals Committee being those set out in Regulations D1.4 and E1.4

25

AU-UESEC-25-6663-A

2026/27

F3.9 The Secretary of the Senate Disciplinary Appeals Committee shall inform the student
in writing of the Senate Disciplinary Appeals Committee's decision within 10 working
days of the meeting.
F3.10 The decision of the Senate Disciplinary Appeals Committee shall be final.
F4

The Office of the Independent Adjudicator for Higher Education

F4.1

If a student is not satisfied with the way that the University has considered their
appeal they may apply to the Office of the Independent Adjudicator (OIA) for an
independent review of the case. The OIA operates an independent student
complaints scheme pursuant to the Higher Education Act 2004. The OIA will
normally review a case only if all internal University procedures have been
exhausted. Complainants who are considering an application to the OIA are
therefore advised to contact the Secretary to the University Disciplinary Board or the
University Academic Misconduct Board to confirm that this is the case and to obtain
a ‘completion of procedures letter’, if this has not already been provided. If you
require assistance in submitting a complaint you may wish to contact the Advice
Centre in Aston Students’ Union. Aston, like all Universities, is required to comply
with the rules of the OIA’s scheme. The service provided by the OIA is free to
students.

26

APPENDIX: Summary of Process for the Consideration of Allegations of
Academic Offences
School Referral to Academic Offences Officer

Suspected
Academic
Offence if
identified by
member of
the Module
Team

Member of
the Module
Team
makes
referral o
relevant
Academic
Offences
Officer*
including all
supporting
evidence.

Academic
Offences Officer
reviews evidence
and determines
no academic
offence has
occurred.

Academic
Offences Officer
reviews evidence
and determines
that an academic
offence is
suspected.

Assessment is referred
back to the Module Team to
resolve outstanding issues
through normal marking
practices.

Student is notified of
date and time of
Stage One hearing
with Academic
Offences Officer via
emailed letter.
(Optional: The
Academic Offences
Officer may hold an
informal meeting
with the student
prior to this)

Student
responds to
confirm
attendance.

Proceed with Stage One hearing
with student present.

Student advises
they are unable
to attend the
scheduled
hearing.

One alternative date is offered
and then proceed to Stage One
hearing with or without student
present.

Student does
not respond.

If student does not respond
after at least one follow-up
communication attempt,
proceed to Stage One hearing
without student present.

Supporting Notes:
The referral to the Academic Offences Officer should include all supporting evidence to enable the Academic Offences Officer to determine if
there is a case to answer, noting that in addition to the text-matching software report, copies of the key identified original sources should also be
provided to enable comparison. A text-matching software report alone is usually insufficient to determine if plagiarism has occurred.

Stage One hearing with Academic Offences Officer

If the student is
present, the charge
will be clearly
articulated to them
and they are asked if
they accept the
jurisdiction of the
Academic Offences
Officer.
It is probable that that
an academic offence
has occurred.

Academic Offences
Officer conducts the
Stage One hearing
and makes their
determination that:

If the student is not
present due to nonengagement with the
Stage One hearing,
the Academic
Offences Officer will:
No academic offence
has occurred but
there is a potential
risk that the student
will commit a future
offence.

Informal warning
issued and all
stakeholders notified
that the process has
been resolved.

There is no case to
answer.

All stakeholders
notified of the
outcome of the
process.

If they do not accept
the jurisdiction of the
Academic Offences
Officer, the case is
referred to the
Academic
Misconduct Board.
If they accept the
jurisdiction of the of
Academic Offences
Officer, they may
accept or deny the
charge.
move to Stage Two
of the process if the
severity
of the offence is
below severity
level 4.
refer the case to the
Academic Misconduct
Board
if the severity level is
4 or above.

If they accept the
charge, the Academic
Offences Officer will
proceed to Stage Two
of the hearing.
If they deny the
charge the
case is referred to the
Academic Misconduct
Board.

Process following completion of Stage One hearing with Academic Offences Officer
On completion of the Stage One hearing progress to Stage Two hearing if:
The student accepts the charge and accepts the jurisdiction of the Academic Offences Officer
The student does not engage with the Stage One hearing and/or does not respond to a charge
when notified via emailed letter for cases with where the severity of the offense is deemed to be
below level 4.
In these cases, the appropriate penalty will be imposed by the Academic Offenses Officer in line
with the Tariff of Penalties.
On completion of the Stage One hearing refer to the University Academic Misconduct Board
if:
The student accepts the charge but does not accept the jurisdiction of the Academic Offences
Officer.
The Academic Offences Officer wishes to refer the case if the offence is not clearly covered in the
regulations.
The student denies the charge
The student does not engage with the Stage One hearing for cases with a severity at level 4 or
above.
The student has been charged with any (alleged) severity level 4 academic offence. This applies
regardless of whether the charge is accepted or denied
The student has been charged with (allegedly) contracting or purchasing material and is severity
level 4. This applies regardless of whether the charge is accepted or denied
The student has been charged with 2+ (alleged) academic offences and is considered to be a
repeat academic offence of any severity level. This applies regardless of whether the charge is
accepted or denied
The student is charged with an (alleged) academic offence of any severity level and the student is
enrolled on a PhD or Professional Doctorate Programme (level 8). This applies regardless of
whether the charge is accepted or denied
The student is charged with an (alleged) academic offence of any severity level and the student is
already subject to a suspended expulsion for any previous breach of the Regulations of Student
Discipline. This applies regardless of whether the charge is accepted or denied.

Table 1

Stage Two hearing with Academic Offences Officer

Commence
Stage Two of
the hearing
with the
Academic
Offences
Officer.

Before making their final
decision as to what, if any,
penalty should be applied, the
Academic Offences Officer
considers any mitigation and /
or exceptional circumstances
presented by the student. If
the student is not present at
the hearing written evidence
submitted by the student must
also be considered.

The charge and decision is
clearly articulated to the
student via emailed letter,
including information
regarding the 10-day appeal
period for the student to
appeal. For students who are
present in the meeting, this
will also include verbal
confirmation in the hearing.

No Appeal Received:
Penalty applied at end
of appeal period.

Appeal Received:
Penalty applied (if
appropriate) on
completion of internal
appeal procedures.

Refer to the University Academic Misconduct Board
Academic Offences Officer refers the case to the Secretary of the University Academic
Misconduct Board following the procedure set out in the Regulations on Student
Discipline.
Supporting notes
1.

Ensure sufficient evidence that due process has been followed is provided,
including:
a. Evidence of invitation to Stage One hearing
b. All evidence / documentation used as part of the Academic Offences
Officers investigation, noting that the University Academic Misconduct
Board will not usually consider evidence that has not previously been
made available to the student
c. In cases of (alleged) plagiarism, original source materials should also be
provided for the key sources. The University Academic Misconduct Board
will not usually consider a case of (alleged) plagiarism based solely on the
report from the text-matching software
d. Evidence of the specific charge that has been brought against the student
noting that the University Academic Misconduct Board will only adjudicate
on this charge
e. Accurate minutes of the Stage One hearing, signed by the relevant
Academic Offences Officer
f. A charge letter Evidence of the student’s response to the charge where
available

2.

Ensure that all documentation has been appropriately redacted before referral
to the Secretary of the University Academic Misconduct Board.
