Generative Artificial Intelligence Software and Academic Integrity: a short guide for students

Introduction
Generative artificial intelligence (gen-AI) software is becoming an ever-increasing part of our lives with a range of free and subscription-based services.  As societal and employment use of Gen-AI grows, it is important education embraces appropriate and ethical use.

The University want you to have the Gen-AI skills needed for your future career, however the University will be ensuring that it maintains the academic integrity on its programmes, and that ultimately that it is you (and not Gen-AI software) that is meeting the programme learning outcomes of your degree.
What can gen-AI be useful for?
Gen-AI can be incredibly useful, for example for:
Organizing typed notes
Helping provide explanations of concepts
‘Clean-up’ automatic transcripts from videos
Translating text (e.g. from a research paper or text)
Summarizing published sources
Developing ideas or plans
Helping to improve grammar
Analysing or manipulating data
Producing image, video and audio content

What are the potential limitations of Gen-AI?
Factual accuracy cannot always be guaranteed.
Potential to ‘hallucinate’ information – it can be hard to tell fact from fiction.
Gen-AI technology perform less well with respect to specialist subjects.
There is the potential for references to be fabricated.
There is the potential for bias to Western perspectives and potential to perpetuate stereotypes.
Some languages are under-represented in the Large Language Models that underpin Gen-AI.
Gen-AI and assessment
The University does not ban you from using Gen-AI in your studies.  However, your use needs to be ethical and appropriate.

The University has Gen-AI categories for assessment, which guide you on how Gen-AI can be used in completing the assessment. The Gen-AI categories are explained in Table 1.

If there are any subject-specific rules or requirements around Gen-AI that are set by professional or accrediting organizations, these will be communicated to you where necessary.

Table 1: Gen-AI categories for assessment
Category
Category 1 assessments
Category 2 assessments
Category 3 assessments
Definition
Gen-AI may be used to prepare for the assessment, however the type and logistics of the assessment mean it is not possible for you to be able to use Gen-AI software during the assessment itself.
You may use Gen-AI to help you complete the assessment, but must adhere to the guiding principle below and declare if and how you have used it using the Gen-AI coversheet.
These are designed so that you must use Gen-AI as part of the assessment requirements so as to support Gen-AI skills development. You must declare how they have used it using the Gen-AI coversheet.
Examples
In-person presentation, assessed interview or viva voce, in-person examination, practical assessment, field or laboratory notebook (depending when submitted), Objective Structured Clinical Examination (OSCE), contemporaneous in-class assessment.
Written coursework, coursework involving creative outputs, coursework based upon experiential activities, take-home/online examinations.
Critique of Gen-AI produced content, coursework requiring Gen-AI use e.g. production of an artefact.
Guiding Principle

Gen-AI may be used in preparation for the assessment, but the assessment arrangements mean its use in the assessment itself will not be possible.
Gen-AI may be used to help complete the assessment, however, the fundamental content of the submission (e.g., the basic written expression, arguments, interpretations, conclusions etc.) of the work submitted should be your own.
The assessment must ensure equity of access of Gen-AI and the assessment criteria focusing on effectiveness of use.

Gen-AI Coversheet
You will complete and submit this with all Category 2 and Category 3 assessments. Module staff will make a copy of the coversheet available to you as part of the assessment information. A copy is available in Appendix 1. The University are using the Gen-AI coversheet to help promote openness around the use of Gen-AI and to allow you to declare your ethical and appropriate use.
Gen-AI and academic integrity
Whilst the University does not ban the use of Gen-AI, it is possible that inappropriate or unethical use may contravene the University’s Academic Integrity Procedure and may be penalised as a result. For example, due to an instance of plagiarism or use of an essay mill or through breaching requirements for honesty (e.g. making a false declaration on the Gen-AI coversheet).

For assessments on programmes covered by Bangor’s Fitness to Practise Procedure, use of Gen-AI beyond that declared on the Gen-AI coversheet and/or misrepresentation of use, may represent a breach of the fitness to practice requirements for that programme. If your degree is covered by the Fitness to Practice Procedure, this will be explained to you.
What if I have a question about an assessment?
If you do have any queries about a particular assessment, you should discuss this with the member of staff who set the assessment.

Appendix 1

Gen-AI in assessment declaration
Student 500 number:________________
Module Code:______________________
Assessment:_______________________
Assessment’s Gen-AI Category (see the Assessment Brief): 2 or 3 (delate as appropriate)
The following statement reflects my use of Gen-AI within this assessment (select all that apply):
Description of use
Select (X)
Gen-AI has not been used at all in producing this assessment
Gen-AI was used in an assistive role to research topics and provide explanations.
Gen-AI was used in an assistive role to suggest sources of information, e.g. publications to read.
Gen-AI was used in an assistive role to summarize the content of publications or other sources.
Gen-AI was used in an assistive role to produce an outline or draft structure of my assessment.
Note: for Category 2 assessments, the fundamental content of the submission (e.g., the arguments, interpretations, conclusions etc) must be your own.
Gen-AI was used in an assistive role to improve spelling, grammar, sentence structure and/or clarity of expression of my assessment.
Note: for Category 2 assessments, the basic written expression must be your own. So whilst Gen-AI may correct mistakes it must not produce the actual content.
Gen-AI was used in an assistive role to translate text during the production of the work.
Gen-AI was used in an assistive role to analyse data and/or produce visualizations of data.
Gen-AI was used in an assistive role to help produce creative outputs e.g. art, imagery, movie, music, creative writing.
Gen-AI was used in an assistive role to refine computer code and/or other output.
Gen-AI was used in another assistive role (please describe):
Gen-AI was fully used to complete a Category 3 assessment and use complied with the assessment instructions provided.
By using this cover sheet and entering my student ID above, I declare that I have provided honest and accurate details regarding my use of Gen-AI within this assessment.
