Code of Practice
Academic Integrity
2026-27

UNIVERSITY OF BIRMINGHAM

CODE OF PRACTICE ON ACADEMIC INTEGRITY
(INCLUDING PLAGIARISM AND CONDUCT IN EXAMINATIONS AND CLASS TESTS)

Page 1 of 21

Code of Practice
Academic Integrity
2026-27

Index of Points
1.
2.
3.
4.

Introduction
Principal Academic Unit (PAU) Responsibilities
Student Responsibilities
General Considerations Relating to Determining the Appropriate Procedure
Part A – Plagiarism related concerns and investigations

5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

Identifying Concerns
Academic Integrity Concerns That May Be Addressed Without a Formal Investigation
Identifying and Referring Plagiarism Related Concerns to the Academic Integrity Officer
Plagiarism Investigation
Categories of Plagiarism – Following an Investigation
Part B – Examination Irregularity Concerns and Investigations

10. Identifying and Referring Examination Irregularity Concerns for Investigation
11. Minor Examination Irregularity Concerns – That Do Not Require a Formal Investigation
12. Examination Irregularity Investigations
13. Categories of Examination Irregularity
Part C – Consequences of a Plagiarism and Examination Irregularities (Moderate and
Serious findings)
14. Moderate Plagiarism or Moderate Examination Irregularity
15. Serious Plagiarism, Serious Examination Irregularities and other reasons for referral to a
College Misconduct and Fitness to Practise Committee
16. Relationship to other Procedures
Appendix A – Plagiarism Related Concerns
Appendix B – Examination Irregularity Related Concerns
Appendix C – Academic Integrity Educative Resolution (AIER) Pathway

Page 2 of 21

Code of Practice
Academic Integrity
2026-27

1.

Introduction

1.1.

The University has an obligation to uphold the academic integrity of the degrees, diplomas
and certificates it awards. Academic Integrity refers to the values and practices of the
academic community and includes undertaking Assessments honestly and responsibly,
respecting others’ ideas. The University’s approach is intended to be fair and proportionate,
supporting student learning while protecting academic standards.

1.2.

This Code of Practice applies to all Registered Students, Students on Leave of Absence,
Students with Thesis Awaited Status, Externally Registered Students and Graduands
(‘Students’).

1.3.

This Code of Practice relates to all assessed academic work (Assessments) required for
academic progress or award (e.g., summative assessments) which include:
1.3.1 ‘Coursework’, which means written assignments, data interpretation and calculations,
essays, reports, dissertations, theses, portfolios, projects, presentations;
1.3.2 ‘Practical Examinations’, which means clinical assessments, laboratory assessments,
oral examinations;
1.3.3 ‘Class Tests’, which means timed assignments, including data interpretation and
calculations, and timed essays;
1.3.4 ‘Written Examinations’, which means Centrally Coordinated Written Examinations,
which are those arranged by the Examinations Office, Principal Academic Unit (PAU)
Written Examinations, which are those arranged by the PAU;
1.3.5 ‘Online (digital) Examinations’, which means an examination that is taken online
using a device connected to the internet;
1.3.6 ‘Take-home’ Examinations, which means an open book examination where students
normally have a period of time to download the examination paper, answer the
questions, and then submit their answers online; and
1.3.7 any other Assessment type not covered by the categories mentioned above.

1.4.

Any Assessment will be liable to scrutiny to identify potential academic integrity concerns,
including plagiarism or other forms of academic misconduct which are addressed under this
Code. This scrutiny may include but is not limited to: the use of text-matching and other
software, and the use of invigilators in Written and Online Examinations.

1.5.

One form of academic misconduct is plagiarism, which can occur in all types of Assessment
when a student claims as their own, intentionally or by omission, work which was not done
by that student. This may occur in a number of ways e.g. copying and pasting material,
adapting material and self-plagiarism. Submitting work and Assessments created by
someone or something else, as if it was your own, is plagiarism and is a form of academic
misconduct. This includes Artificial Intelligence (AI)-generated content, content written by a
third party (e.g. a company, other person, or a friend or family member), and fabricated data.
Other examples of what constitutes plagiarism are set out in Appendix A to this Code of
Practice.

1.6.

Practical Examination Irregularities, Class Test Irregularities and Written Examination
Irregularities occur when a student fails to follow oral and written instructions for the
Assessment, and include but are not limited to, the examples set out in Appendix B of this
Code of Practice.

Page 3 of 21

Code of Practice
Academic Integrity
2026-27

1.7.

For the purposes of this Code of Practice, any department within Corporate Services
delivering a Programme or module of the University is considered to be the PAU in respect
of that Programme.

1.8.

For the purpose of this procedure, ‘working days’ refers to University working days (i.e.
Monday to Friday, excluding Public Holidays and University Closed Days).

1.9.

In the case of students based at the University’s overseas campuses, working days will
reflect national public holidays and any locally designated closed days.

1.10.

During a period of study abroad, students will be subject to the rules and procedures of their
host institution in relation to academic misconduct.

2.

PAU Responsibilities

2.1.

The PAU has the following responsibilities for promoting good academic conduct among
students in relation to all Assessments:
2.1.1

To provide to students during the induction process and in writing, in Programme
materials and other media as appropriate, guidance on academic integrity and
plagiarism, which should cover Programme-specific content and include:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)

referencing (and any preferred referencing style);
how to avoid plagiarism;
acceptable use of a proof-reader, including guidance on declaring the use of a
proof-reader; and
expectations regarding the appropriate use of AI tools in Assessments,
including where such AI use is permitted, how it must be acknowledged, and
examples of unacceptable use.

2.1.2 Where Programmes include collaborative/group work:
(a)
(b)

to advise on the boundary between legitimate collaboration and inappropriate
collaboration/collusion;
to advise on any method to be used to demonstrate individual and/or collective
contributions.

2.1.3 To provide to students during the induction process and in writing, in Programme
materials and other media as appropriate, guidance on conduct and permitted
materials in Practical Examinations, Class Tests and Written Examinations, Online
and Take-Home Examinations, including any module-specific rules set out in the
rubric.
2.2.

Where a PAU has in place any formal learning agreement relating to the avoidance of
plagiarism, advice will be given to students on the requirements before a student is asked to
sign the agreement.

2.3.

All PAUs will have in place an Academic Integrity Officer (AIO) who will normally be
nominated by the Head of School or Head of PAU (or nominee).

Page 4 of 21

Code of Practice
Academic Integrity
2026-27

2.4.

The PAU will have in place methods for upholding the Academic Integrity of its Assessments
including:
•
•
•

methods of detecting any plagiarism;
procedures to review, monitor and quality-assure reports generated by any textmatching or other software;
procedures to detect issues around conduct in Practical Examinations, Class Tests and
PAU Written Examinations.

2.5.

PAUs will assist with the implementation of procedures to detect issues around conduct, in
Centrally Coordinated Written Examinations.

3.

Student Responsibilities

3.1.

Students are expected to undertake their Assessments with Academic Integrity and in doing
so have the following responsibilities:
3.1.1 To familiarise themselves with the guidance provided by the PAU and/or the
University, in relation to the avoidance of plagiarism, including any requirements
relating to the use and acknowledgement of AI tools.
3.1.2 To comply with Assessment instructions regarding the use of third-party tools and
resources (including AI tools) and to make any required declarations or
acknowledgements.
3.1.3 To familiarise themselves with guidance provided by the PAU and the University in
relation to conduct in Practical Examinations, Class Tests and Written Examinations.
3.1.4 To follow written and oral instructions provided in relation to all Practical
Examinations, Class Tests and Written Examinations, including:
(a)
(b)
(c)

the announcements made at the start, during, and at the end of the Practical
Examination, Class Test and Written Examination;
the instructions at the top of the question paper (rubric); and
any other instructions provided by the PAU and/or University in relation to the
Practical Examination, Class Test or Written Examination.

3.2.

Students will be expected to provide evidence of their identity in Class Tests and Written
Examinations by displaying their University identification card on the desk.

4.

General Considerations Relating to Determining the Appropriate Procedure

4.1.

Where concerns are raised about a student’s behaviour during an Assessment,
consideration will be given to the nature of the concerns and how they were identified to
determine the appropriate route under this Code. This may include resolution through an
educative route for eligible first-time, low-level academic integrity offences, or investigation
as a plagiarism-related concern or an Examination Irregularity-related concern. More
information is provided later in this Code of Practice about the identification and types of
concerns.

Page 5 of 21

Code of Practice
Academic Integrity
2026-27

4.2.

The University will not normally investigate concerns raised anonymously unless there is
other corroborating information or evidence. Where anonymous concerns are received, the
University will consider the nature and severity of the report and any corroborating
information before deciding whether to commence an investigation.

4.3.

Where there is a reasonable suspicion that plagiarism or an Examination Irregularity may
have occurred in an Assessment for which marks have been confirmed, and the student has
not graduated, an investigation may be carried out in exceptional circumstances with the
permission of the Chair of the Board of Examiners. This will normally apply only to the most
recent academic year. Where there are exceptional circumstances and sufficient evidence
that plagiarism or an Examination Irregularity has occurred in a previous academic year,
permission to investigate must be sought from the Deputy Pro-Vice-Chancellor (Education
Policy and Academic Standards). An investigation may to lead to a change to the confirmed
mark.

4.4.

If concerns are raised after the student has graduated, the University will not be able to
investigate under this Code of Practice, but will consider whether to invoke the procedure to
revoke a degree under University Ordinance 4.8.

Part A – Plagiarism Related Concerns and Investigations
5.

Identifying Concerns
Concerns may be raised about a student’s academic writing in all types of Assessments.
This could include Assessments involving coursework, computer code and images (e.g.
posters and graphs). Some of these concerns may be low level and can be addressed
through the marking scheme and by providing advice to the student. Where concerns are
more substantial, the matter will be considered to determine the appropriate procedure
under this Code. This may include resolution through the Academic Integrity Educative
Resolution (AIER) Pathway (Appendix C), or a formal investigation to determine whether
plagiarism has occurred and, if so, the category of plagiarism.

6.

Academic Integrity Concerns That May Be Addressed Without a Formal Investigation

6.1.

Minor Academic Concerns that can be addressed through the marking process:
Where the Marker identifies minor issues in a student’s work (e.g. missing quotation marks,
minor missing references or an incomplete bibliography), provided the marking scheme
allows it, the student’s mark would normally be affected. The Marker should normally provide
comments on the concerns in the Assessment feedback. The Marker may contact the
student’s Personal Academic Tutor or similar role or the PAU AIO to inform them so that
they can provide the student with further guidance on good academic practice.

6.2.

Poor Academic Practice – where an advice letter is sent to the student, but no formal
investigation is required:
Poor Academic Practice arises where a student has not followed expected academic
conventions and may not yet be familiar with the requirements of University level
Assessments. Where such concerns are raised by the Marker, it is likely that the student’s

Page 6 of 21

Code of Practice
Academic Integrity
2026-27

mark will be affected, as with Minor Academic Concerns. The Marker will confirm with the
AIO that the concerns amount to Poor Academic Practice and do not require a plagiarism
investigation or resolution through the AIER Pathway.
If the AIO agrees that the concerns amount to Poor Academic Practice, the student will be
sent a letter advising them of the issues identified. The letter will advise the student to refamiliarise themselves with resources available and to discuss good academic practice and
how to avoid plagiarism with their Personal Academic Tutor (or similar role) or PAU AIO. The
Personal Academic Tutor (or similar role) or the PAU AIO will normally follow up with the
student to offer guidance. The PAU will determine the appropriate and make this clear in the
letter.
6.3.

Academic Integrity Educative Resolution (AIER) pathway for eligible first-time offences:
The University operates an Academic Integrity Educative Resolution (AIER) Pathway for
certain first-time, low-level academic integrity offences, including inappropriate use of AI
tools. The AIER Pathway may be applied only in accordance with the eligibility criteria and
exclusions set out in Appendix C.
Where a Marker, Supervisor, or AIO identifies concerns that involve a first-time, low-level
offence, the AIO will consider whether the case is eligible for resolution through AIER in
accordance with Appendix C.
Where a case is resolved through AIER, it does not constitute a formal finding of academic
misconduct and does not result in a formal misconduct outcome being recorded on the
Student’s academic record or transcript. However, a record of the case will be kept on file in
order to determine how any future concerns should be handled.
Where a case is not eligible for AIER, or where the Student does not accept responsibility,
the concerns will be managed under the formal plagiarism investigation process set out in
Section 8.

7.

Identifying and Referring Plagiarism Related Concerns to the Academic Integrity
Officer

7.1.

Examples of concerns that should be investigated under the plagiarism process are set out
in Appendix A. Such concerns are normally identified by:
•
•
•

7.2.

the Marker, or, in PGR cases, the Supervisor or Examiner, or PAU AIO;
the checking of text-matching software or other similar software to assist in the
detection of plagiarism;
checks to determine whether Assessment questions and answers have been posted
on websites.

Where concerns relate to the possibility that plagiarism has occurred, the matter should be
referred to the relevant AIO to determine the appropriate procedure under this Code. This
may include resolution through the AIER Pathway in accordance with Appendix C or, where
appropriate, a formal investigation under Section 8. The relevant AIO will normally be based
in the PAU for the module in which the concerns have been raised.

Page 7 of 21

Code of Practice
Academic Integrity
2026-27

7.3.

Where it is suspected that plagiarism has occurred in a project or thesis submitted by a
student on a postgraduate research programme of study, examination of the project or thesis
must be suspended until it has been established whether or not plagiarism has occurred.

8.

Plagiarism Investigation

8.1.

Before commencing a formal plagiarism investigation, the AIO will consider whether the case
is eligible for resolution through the AIER Pathway (Appendix C). Where the case is eligible
and the student accepts responsibility, the PAU may resolve the matter through AIER rather
than initiating the formal investigation process.

8.2.

An AIO who suspects that plagiarism may have occurred will undertake an investigation,
which would normally involve considering evidence. This may include a report generated by
text-matching software, or observations reported by the Marker or Invigilator.

8.3.

Where, following the investigation, the AIO has a reasonable suspicion that plagiarism has
occurred, the student will be given the opportunity to respond to the allegation and will be
invited to a meeting (the Academic Integrity Meeting).

8.4.

The AIO will write to the student notifying them of the concerns and inviting them to the
Academic Integrity Meeting. The student should normally be given at least five working days’
notice of the Academic Integrity Meeting.

8.5.

The AIO reserves the right to hold a meeting online, or by other means where it is deemed
appropriate.

8.6.

If the student fails to confirm their attendance at the Academic Integrity Meeting, and/or
confirms they will attend but fails to do so, the meeting may proceed in the student’s
absence.

8.7.

The student can be accompanied to the Academic Integrity Meeting by a Friend, as defined
in University Regulation 1. The student is responsible for arranging for any Friend to
accompany them to the meeting. The student should, in advance of the Academic Integrity
Meeting, inform the AIO of the name and status of the Friend who will be accompanying
them.

8.8.

During or in advance of the Academic Integrity Meeting, the student should bring any
mitigating factors to the AIO’s attention, and where appropriate provide supporting evidence.
Mitigating factors will normally be considered in determining the sanction only and not
whether or not plagiarism has occurred or the category of plagiarism. Where a student has
issues that have impacted them, they will normally be expected to request an extension to
their submission deadline in advance of the submission.

8.9.

Following the Academic Integrity Meeting, the AIO will decide whether plagiarism has
occurred and, where it has, will assign a category and apply an appropriate sanction. The
AIO may consult other appropriate members of staff who attended the Academic Integrity
Meeting.

8.10.

This outcome should be communicated to the student in writing (the outcome letter),
normally within five working days of the Academic Integrity Meeting. Where the AIO has
asked the student to provide further information to assist with the decision, the outcome

Page 8 of 21

Code of Practice
Academic Integrity
2026-27

letter will normally be issued within five working days of the deadline for providing that
information. The outcome letter will include key points of the discussions which took place in
the meeting and the reasons for the decision. The letter should be retained on the student’s
file.
9.

Categories of Plagiarism – Following an Investigation

9.1.

This section applies where a formal plagiarism investigation has been undertaken under
Section 8. There are two levels of plagiarism: Moderate Plagiarism and Serious Plagiarism.
Following an investigation the AIO will assign a category, taking into consideration a number
of factors, including those set out below:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
9.1.1

the academic level (e.g. F, C, I, H, M, D as detailed in Regulation 6) of the student;
whether there is a reasonable expectation that the student should have learned
appropriate referencing skills and received sufficient guidance;
the nature of the irregularity;
the severity or proportion of the work affected;
whether there have been any previous recorded instances of plagiarism.
Moderate Plagiarism

Moderate plagiarism arises when a student fails to follow guidelines on what is regarded as
the student’s own original work, including by ignoring conventions or failing to follow
acceptable academic practice.
9.1.2

Serious Plagiarism – Academic Misconduct

Serious plagiarism arises where there has been reasonably extensive unattributed or
incorrectly attributed copying and/or self-plagiarism. Serious plagiarism also arises where
there has been an attempt to deceive the Marker by the student passing off as their own
work which they have not done, including submitting work that has, in full or in part, been
produced by a third party. This category also includes repeated Moderate Plagiarism.

See Part C for the consequences of a decision of Moderate or Serious Plagiarism

Part B – Examination Irregularity Concerns and Investigations
10.

Identifying and Referring Examination Irregularity Concerns for Investigation

10.1.

Where an investigation is required into Examination Irregularity concerns, it will initially be
reviewed by Student Conduct, Complaints and Appeals (SCCA), or for students subject to
Fitness to Practise requirements, the relevant PAU. The person nominated by SCCA or the
PAU to undertake the investigation will be the Investigating Officer.

10.2.

Concerns that may be investigated as an Examination Irregularity are those that relate to a
student’s conduct during an in-person examination, online examination, take-home
examination or class test or other similar assessments (Examination). Concerns investigated
as a possible Examination Irregularity are normally those where:

Page 9 of 21

Code of Practice
Academic Integrity
2026-27

•
•
•
•

the invigilator has observed unacceptable behaviour from a student during an
Examination;
evidence has been received that suggests a student has communicated with another
party, or other student during an Examination;
evidence has been received that suggests a student may have been in possession of
non-permitted items during an Examination;
evidence has been received that suggests a student may not have observed the
rules of an Examination, and the concerns are not appropriate to be addressed under
Part A of this Code (including through the AIER Pathway).

10.3.

When a report of Examination Irregularity concerns is received the, Investigating Officer will
decide whether there is sufficient evidence and/or information to undertake an investigation.

10.4.

Unauthorised items may be confiscated, inspected and retained as evidence until
disciplinary proceedings and any related appeals are completed.

11.

Minor Examination Irregularity Concerns – That Do Not Require a Formal Investigation

11.1.

A Minor Examination Irregularity occurs when a student has breached the rules of the
assessment, but it can reasonably be determined that this was accidental and was unlikely
to have allowed them to gain an unfair advantage in the Assessment.

11.2.

Where the PAU identifies concerns that could amount to a Minor Examination Irregularity, a
referral should be made to SCCA, or, for students subject to Fitness to Practise
requirements, the nominated individual within the PAU. The Investigating Officer will decide
whether a Minor Examination Irregularity has occurred or whether a formal investigation is
required.

11.3.

Where it is decided that a Minor Examination Irregularity has occurred, the Student will be
sent an advisory letter. This letter is to inform the Student that concerns were raised about
their Assessment, advise them to re-familiarise themselves with resources on the rules of
examinations, and recommend that they discuss good conduct in examinations with their
Personal Academic Tutor (or similar role), where appropriate.

12.

Examination Irregularity Investigations

12.1.

Where an investigation is commenced, the Student will be given the opportunity to respond
to the allegation and will be invited to a meeting (the Examination Irregularity Meeting).

12.2.

The Investigating Officer will write to the Student giving them a summary of the concerns
raised and inviting them to the Examination Irregularity Meeting. The Student should
normally be given at least five working days’ notice of the Examination Irregularity Meeting.

12.3.

The Investigating Officer reserves the right to hold a meeting online, or by other means,
where it is deemed appropriate.

12.4.

If the Student fails to confirm their attendance at the Examination Irregularity Meeting and/or
confirms they will attend but fails to do so, the meeting may proceed in the Student’s
absence.

Page 10 of 21

Code of Practice
Academic Integrity
2026-27

12.5.

The Student can be accompanied to the Examination Irregularity Meeting by a Friend, as
defined in University Regulation 1. The Student is responsible for arranging for any Friend to
accompany them to the meeting. The Student should, in advance of the Examination
Irregularity Meeting, inform the Investigating Officer of the name and status of the Friend
who will be accompanying them.

12.6.

During or in advance of the Examination Irregularity Meeting, the Student should bring to the
Investigating Officer’s attention any mitigating factors they want the Investigating Officer to
consider and, where appropriate, provide supporting evidence. Mitigating factors will
normally be considered in determining the sanction only and not whether or an Examination
Irregularity has occurred or the category of Examination Irregularity.

12.7.

Following the Examination Irregularity meeting, the Investigating Officer will decide whether
or not an Examination Irregularity has occurred, and if so, assign a category. Depending on
the category, an appropriate sanction will be applied.

12.8.

Once the category of the Examination Irregularity has been determined by the Investigating
Officer, an appropriate sanction will be determined by an academic member of staff. For
students subject to Fitness to Practise requirements, the sanction will be determined by the
Investigating Officer or a nominated decision maker.

12.9.

For students investigated by SCCA, the Investigating Officer will provide a summary report
to the nominated person(s) in the PAU who will consider the matter and decide on the
appropriate sanction. In deciding the sanction, consideration will be given to the
circumstances of the Examination Irregularity and any mitigation provided by the Student.

12.10. The nominated person(s) in the PAU will provide their decision on the sanction, and reasons
for the decision, to the Investigating Officer within five working days of receiving the report
from SCCA.
12.11. If following the Examination Irregularity Meeting, the Investigating Officer needs to carry out
further investigation (e.g. request a report from the Marker or obtain technical information
from the Virtual Learning Environment), they will inform the Student that further investigation
is being carried out. The Investigating Officer may invite the Student to another Examination
Irregularity Meeting if needed following further investigation.
12.12. The outcome, including any sanction applied, will be communicated to the Student in writing
(the Outcome Letter). The Outcome Letter will include key points of the discussions which
took place in the meeting, the decision and the reasons for the decision, and should be
retained on the Student’s file.
13.

Categories of Examination Irregularity

13.1.

This section applies where a formal Examination Irregularity investigation has been
undertaken under Section 12. There are two levels of Examination Irregularity: a Moderate
Examination Irregularity and a Serious Examination Irregularity. Following an investigation,
the Investigating Officer will assign a category, taking into consideration a number of factors,
including those set out below:
(a)

the academic level (e.g. F, C, I, H, M, D as detailed in Regulation 6) of the Student;

Page 11 of 21

Code of Practice
Academic Integrity
2026-27

(b)

whether there is a reasonable expectation that the Student should have known and
understood the Assessment rules and had received sufficient guidance;
the nature and/or severity of the irregularity;
whether there have been any previous recorded Examination Irregularities.

(c)
(d)
13.2.

Moderate Examination Irregularity
A Moderate Examination Irregularity arises where sufficient guidance has been provided on
the rules of the Assessment and:
•
•
•

13.3.

the Student fails to follow the rules of the Assessment, and/or
their actions appear to be accidental or without intention, and/or
the actions could have allowed them to gain some advantage in the Assessment.

Serious Examination Irregularity – Academic Misconduct
A Serious Examination Irregularity arises where sufficient guidance has been provided on
the rules of the Assessment and:
•
•
•

the Student fails to follow the rules of the Assessment, and/or
their actions may not have been accidental, or there seems to have been an intention
or premeditation, and/or
the actions may have allowed the Student to gain an unfair advantage in the
Assessment.

See Part C for the consequences of a decision of Moderate or Serious Examination
Irregularity

Part C – Consequences of Plagiarism and Examination Irregularities
(Moderate and Serious Findings)
14.

Moderate Plagiarism or Moderate Examination Irregularity

14.1.

This section applies where a formal investigation has been undertaken and a finding of
Moderate Plagiarism or Moderate Examination Irregularity has been made.

14.2.

Where a finding of Moderate Plagiarism or a Moderate Examination Irregularity has been
made, a sanction shall be applied from the list below.
14.2.1 Taught Programmes or Modules
For Students on taught Programmes of study, or Students on research-based Programmes
of study where Moderate Plagiarism or a Moderate Examination Irregularity has been found
to have occurred on a taught module taken as part of that Programme:
(a)

the Assessment mark obtained to stand;

Page 12 of 21

Code of Practice
Academic Integrity
2026-27

(b)

resubmission of/another attempt at the Assessment. The mark for this
resubmission/attempt shall be capped at a mark deemed appropriate by the AIO, and
the cap shall be no lower than the pass mark. This resubmission/attempt counts as
the same attempt under normal assessment regulations (Regulation 7);

(c)

reduce the Assessment mark to an appropriate level, including an award of zero. If
this leads to failure of the module, and another attempt would be permitted under
normal assessment regulations (Regulation 7), a further attempt shall be permitted,
with the overall module mark awarded capped at the pass mark;

(d)

reduce the Assessment mark to an appropriate level, including an award of zero, with
no opportunity to resit.

14.2.2 Research Elements
For Students on research Programmes of study:
(a)

(b)

14.3.

Where Moderate plagiarism has been identified in a research Assessment (which is
not the dissertation/thesis and does not carry a numerical mark), the Student will be
given one further opportunity to submit the Assessment at a date specified by the AIO
in the Outcome Letter.
Where Moderate plagiarism has been identified in the research element (the
dissertation/thesis), the Student may be allowed to resubmit. The resubmission for
the original qualification must be completed within 20 working days from the date of
the Outcome Letter, with the plagiarised sections/data removed and re-worked. The
extent of any additional work will be determined by the AIO and should normally be
limited to ensuring that no sentences are incomplete due to the removal of
plagiarised sections/data. This resubmission counts as the same attempt for
examination purposes. The resubmission must comply with the formatting and
submission requirements outlined in the Code of Practice on Assessment of
Research Degree Theses.

Process for Determining the Sanction
The process for determining the sanction in Moderate Plagiarism and Moderate Examination
Irregularity cases is set out below.
14.3.1 For Moderate Plagiarism cases, the sanction will normally be decided by the AIO or
Investigating Officer.
14.3.2 For students on programmes with fitness to practise, for Moderate Plagiarism cases
and Moderate Examination Irregularity cases, the sanction will be decided by the
Investigating Officer or designated decision-maker.
14.3.3 For Examination Irregularity cases involving Students on programmes of study
without Fitness to Practise requirements, the sanction will be determined by a
nominated academic member of staff within the PAU associated with the affected
module (Examination Irregularity Officer (EIO)).
14.3.4 Where the Investigating Officer determines that a Moderate Examination Irregularity
has occurred, they will provide the EIO with a summary of the matter, including any

Page 13 of 21

Code of Practice
Academic Integrity
2026-27

aggravating or mitigating circumstances that have been identified during the
investigation, such as those raised by the Student. The EIO will be asked to provide
the Investigating Officer with their decision on the sanction within 10 working days of
receiving this summary.
14.3.5 Within five working days of receiving the EIO’s decision on the sanction, the
Investigating Officer will send the Student the Outcome Letter informing them of the
decision that a Moderate Examination Irregularity has occurred and the sanction
applied.
15.

Serious Plagiarism, Serious Examination Irregularities and other reasons for referral
to a College Misconduct and Fitness to Practise Committee

15.1.

If the sanction applied for Moderate Plagiarism or an Examination Irregularity results in the
Student failing the Programme of study, the case shall be referred to a College Misconduct
and Fitness to Practise Committee to be heard in accordance with the Code of Practice on
Misconduct and Fitness to Practise Committee.

15.2.

Where, following an investigation, a decision is made that Serious Plagiarism or a Serious
Examination Irregularity has occurred, the case shall become a case of Academic
Misconduct under the University Regulations Section 8 - Student Conduct and will be
referred to a College Misconduct and Fitness to Practise Committee to be heard in
accordance with the Code of Practice on Misconduct and Fitness to Practise Committee.

15.3.

Where a Student does not agree with the outcome of an Academic Integrity or Examination
Irregularity Meeting, the Student may request that their case be considered by a College
Misconduct and Fitness to Practise Committee in accordance with the Code of Practice on
Misconduct and Fitness to Practise Committee. The request should be submitted to the
Investigating Officer within 10 working days of the Outcome Letter. Requests received after
the 10 working day deadline will only be considered in exceptional circumstances.

16.

Relationship to other Procedures

16.1.

A Student may not normally use other processes, e.g. those under the Code of Practice on
Extenuating Circumstances and/or the Code of Practice on Academic Appeals, to request an
outcome that would change the outcome of an Academic Integrity Meeting, a resolution
under the AIER Pathway, an Examination Irregularity Meeting, or a College Misconduct and
Fitness to Practise Committee.

Page 14 of 21

Code of Practice
Academic Integrity
2026-27

Appendix A – Plagiarism Related Concerns
A.1

Plagiarism
In addition to the definition mentioned earlier, plagiarism includes the following:

A.1.1 Copying in Coursework, Online Examinations and Take-Home Examinations
Presenting as their own work, work done by others. This includes copying the work of another
Student (past or present, from this or another institution), reproducing course materials,
including lecture notes, presentations or data, the cutting and pasting of material derived from
the internet and the direct transcription of the contents of a textbook or journal. This includes
using answers derived from Websites which share study documents and assessments
(whether from the university or other institutions), or websites that will provide answers to
questions posted by students. It may include inadequate or misleading referencing and
paraphrasing.
A.1.2 Self-plagiarism (also called auto-plagiarism)
The reproduction in full, or in part, of work the Student has previously submitted, including
work submitted as part of the same Programme or any previous Programme at this or another
institution. This would also include reproduction of articles, publications, software or code
produced by the Student, without appropriate referencing.
A.1.3 Collusion
Collaboration between two or more Students in preparing a piece of work that is then
presented as their own individual work. This does not include permitted collaboration as part of
group work.
A.1.4 Fabrication or misrepresentation
A Student claiming to have done work submitted, which was never undertaken by that
Student. This includes the negligent, false or misleading representation by a Student of
evidence, results or data which forms part of their submitted work. This constitutes an attempt
to deceive the Marker.
A.1.5 Commissioning work, buying essays and answers1, and submitting third-party or
generated work (including software/code and AI tools)
Submitting as all or part of their Assessment, work they have not done themselves. This
includes work which has been:
•
•
•
•

bought from an essay writing company or website;
downloaded from an essay or solution repository;
produced by another person (including another Student, friend, family member, or paid
third party); or
generated by a tool or system, including generative Artificial Intelligence (AI), where
such use is not expressly permitted.

This applies to all forms of assessed work, including written text, data, images, computer code
or software, calculations, and other outputs. Submitting such work as if it were the Student’s
own would normally constitute a deliberate attempt to deceive the Marker.

1

The Skills and Post-16 Education Act 2022 came into effect on 28th April 2022 and made it illegal for ‘cheating services’
to be provided to students.

Page 15 of 21

Code of Practice
Academic Integrity
2026-27

A.1.6 Unacceptable proof-reading / editorial assistance
Proof-reading or editorial assistance must not involve rewriting or editing that improves the
Student’s academic arguments, contributes new content, or changes substantive meaning.
This applies whether the assistance is provided by a person, by generative AI, or by any other
means. Where such assistance results in work being presented as the Student’s own when it
is not, it may be treated as plagiarism.
In particular, a Student must not use generative AI or other editorial assistance to:
•
•
•
•
•

develop, alter, or extend ideas, arguments, or explanations;
add new content or restructure the work in any way that changes meaning;
correct or improve the accuracy of substantive information;
translate text into, or from, the language being studied; or
reduce length to meet a word limit where this involves substantive rewriting.

Generative AI or other editorial assistance may be permitted only where it is limited to
technical or presentational support, such as:
• correcting spelling and punctuation;
• improving grammar and syntax in written English without changing meaning;
• shortening sentences or paragraphs without changing overall content;
• improving consistency and formatting (e.g. page numbering, headers and footers,
footnotes and endnotes); and
• improving the layout of tables and figures and the clarity of any accompanying
legends.
Exceptions to these restrictions may exist (e.g. within English language study programmes).
The PAU will advise Students of any module- or Assessment-specific requirements,
permissions, and declaration expectations.
For postgraduate research theses written in English, proof-reading by a member of the
supervisory team or a professional or non-professional proof-reader is acceptable to the
extent that it involves clarifying written English only.

Page 16 of 21

Code of Practice
Academic Integrity
2026-27

Appendix B – Examination Irregularity Related Concerns
B.1.

Practical Examinations, Class Tests and Written Examinations
This section sets out guidance about conduct and examples of irregularities in Practical
Examinations, Class Tests and Written Examinations. Where any Assessment permits the
use of specific tools, resources or materials, this will be set out in the rubric or other module
instructions, and Students must comply with those instructions.

B.1.1 Possessing or Accessing Non-Permitted Materials during an Examination or
Class Test
The rubric will inform Students of items that they are permitted to have during an Examination
or Class Test. Students must not have in their possession, or access to, non-permitted items
during a Practical Examination, Class Test or Written Examination, whether or not they have
been used, or were unintentionally or intentionally retained. Such items include:
(a)

(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)

communication devices and other unauthorised electronic, mobile, technical or
computer equipment capable of accessing the internet, email and/or storing data,
including notes and photographs, e.g. a mobile phone or smartwatch;
all papers;
notes; e.g. on paper, in permitted text, on hand or other body part;
textbooks;
bags;
coats, jackets, body warmers and hats with the exception of religious headwear;
correctional/removal fluid or tape.

B.1.2 Copying from another Student
Students must not copy or attempt to copy from another Student’s work.
B.1.3 Obtaining, or attempting to obtain, access to an unseen Assessment
Students must not obtain or access, or attempt to obtain or access, an unseen Assessment,
(e.g. Written Examination questions, or Class Test questions), except where this has been
expressly agreed with the PAU. This includes saving, replaying or taking screenshots of
examination questions posted electronically, such as on social media or similar platforms.
B.1.4 Personation and Impersonation
Students must not be involved in an arrangement whereby another party undertakes the
Assessment on behalf of the Student.
B.1.5 Non-Permitted Communication
Students must not communicate, or attempt to communicate, with another party (except
Invigilators) inside or outside of the Practical Examination, Class Test or Written Examination
venue during the Practical Examination, Class Test or Written Examination.
B.1.6 Non-Permitted Communication in Online and Take-Home Examinations
Students must not communicate about the content of online examinations or take-home
examinations during the examination window. The examination window is the time period
during which the examination can be commenced by any Student and not just the amount of
time to complete the examination once it has been commenced (e.g. where there is a 24 hour
time-frame to start the examination and two hours to complete once started). This includes,
but is not limited to, sharing information about examination questions and answers where a

Page 17 of 21

Code of Practice
Academic Integrity
2026-27

Student has completed their own examination but those they are communicating with have not
started or completed the examination.
B.1.7 Non-Permitted Use of Automatic Solvers in Online and Take-Home Examinations
Students must not use online or automatic solvers (or similar tools) in an online or take-home
Examination unless specifically permitted by the rubric or other module instructions.
B.1.8 Causing a Disturbance
Students must not cause a disturbance to those in the Practical Examination, Class Test or
Written Examination venue.
B.1.9 Pencil Cases and Other Containers
All containers left on a Student’s desk during the examination, including pencil cases or boxes,
spectacle cases or drinks containers, must be transparent and should not contain any notes or
other non-permitted materials.
B.1.10 Dictionaries
Students whose first language is not English will be permitted to use a standard paper, nontechnical, un-annotated and un-marked dictionary, except where the rubric specifically states
this is not permitted.
B.1.11 Student ID
Where there is uncertainty over the identity of the Student undertaking a Practical
Examination, Class Tests or Written Examination, the Student’s identity will be verified after
the Student has concluded the Assessment.

Page 18 of 21

Code of Practice
Academic Integrity
2026-27

Appendix C – Academic Integrity Educative Resolution (AIER) Pathway
C.1 Academic Integrity Educative Resolution (AIER)
C.1.1 The Academic Integrity Educative Resolution (AIER) Pathway provides an educative
resolution route for certain first-time, low-level academic integrity offences, including
inappropriate use of Artificial Intelligence (AI) tools.
C.1.2 AIER may be applied only where the Student accepts responsibility for the offence and the
case meets the eligibility criteria set out in this Appendix.
C.1.3 Resolution through AIER does not constitute a formal finding of academic misconduct and will
not result in a formal misconduct outcome being recorded on the Student’s academic record or
transcript, but will be noted on file for the purposes of determining eligibility in line with
paragraph C.2.1(c).
C.1.4 Where a case is not eligible for AIER, or where the Student does not accept responsibility, the
matter will be managed under the formal procedures set out in this Code of Practice.
C.2 Eligibility criteria
C.2.1 A case may be considered for AIER only where all of the following apply:
a) the Academic Integrity Officer (AIO) determines that an educative resolution is
appropriate;
b) the Student confirms in writing that they accept responsibility for the offence; and
c) there is no previous recorded offence of the same or a similar nature.
C.2.2 In addition, the AIO must confirm that:
a) the offence is limited in scope or severity; and
b) applying AIER will not undermine the intended purpose of the Assessment or its
contribution to the module learning outcomes.
C.2.3 An Assessment is eligible for AIER only where the AIO confirms that one of the following
academic outcomes can be applied:
a) a capped resubmission is available and appropriate; or
b) the Assessment carries low weighting and the Student still has a reasonable
opportunity of passing the module overall if a mark of zero is applied, and there is no
resubmission opportunity.
C.2.4 AIER must not be applied where the concerns relate to misconduct that affects an extensive
proportion of the Assessment, or where the Assessment itself constitutes all, or a substantial
proportion, of the module assessment.
C.2.5 AIER must not be applied to:
a)
b)
c)
d)

final-stage undergraduate dissertations;
Masters dissertations;
major research projects; or
any Assessment that contributes more than 50 per cent of the module mark.

Page 19 of 21

Code of Practice
Academic Integrity
2026-27

C.3 Triage and decision-making
C.3.1 Where concerns are referred to the AIO and appear to involve a first-time, low-level offence,
the AIO will consider whether the case is eligible for AIER.
C.3.2 The AIO will record the decision on eligibility and the reasons for that decision in accordance
with local recording requirements.
C.3.3 Where the AIO determines that the case is eligible, the AIO may offer the Student the AIER
Pathway instead of commencing a formal investigation.
C.4 Student acknowledgement
C.4.1 Where AIER is offered, the Student must sign an acknowledgement confirming that they:
a)
b)
c)
d)

understand the nature of the offence;
accept responsibility for the offence;
agree to complete the required educative programme within the timescale set; and
accept the academic outcome that will apply under C.6.

C.4.2 Where a Student does not sign the acknowledgement, the case will normally be managed
under the formal procedures set out in this Code of Practice.
C.5 Educative programme
C.5.1 The Student must complete an educative programme. This will normally include:
a) learning content relating to academic integrity, including responsible use of AI where
relevant; and
b) a reflective activity in which the Student explains what occurred, why it was
inappropriate, and what they will do differently in future.
C.5.2 The programme will normally be delivered online through the Academic Skills Centre, or
another University service designated for this purpose.
C.5.3 The academic outcome under C.6 must not be applied until the Student has completed the
educative programme.
C.5.4 Where the Student does not complete the programme by the deadline set, the case will
normally be referred to the formal procedures under this Code of Practice, unless an extension
is approved by the AIO on documented grounds.
C.6 Academic outcomes under AIER
C.6.1 Where a case is resolved through AIER, one of the following academic outcomes will apply, as
determined by the AIO in line with Assessment requirements and relevant regulations.
C.6.2 Capped resubmission
a) the Student completes the educative programme;
b) the Student resubmits the work independently within the timeframe set; and
c) the mark for the resubmission will normally be capped at the module pass mark
(normally 40 for undergraduate modules or 50 for postgraduate modules, as
applicable).

Page 20 of 21

Code of Practice
Academic Integrity
2026-27

C.6.3 Zero mark without resubmission
a) this outcome may be applied only where resubmission is not available for the
Assessment;
b) the Student completes the educative programme;
c) a mark of zero is applied for the Assessment; and
d) the AIO confirms that the Student still has a reasonable opportunity to pass the module
overall under the relevant regulations.
C.6.4 The Student will be notified in writing of the outcome applied under C.6.2 or C.6.3.
C.7 Recording and subsequent offences
C.7.1 Where a case is resolved through AIER, the PAU will record the outcome as “Resolved
through AIER Pathway” for internal monitoring purposes and to ensure that AIER is normally
available only once per Student.
C.7.2 An AIER outcome must not be recorded as a formal misconduct finding and must not be
entered on the Student’s transcript.
C.7.3 Where a Student has previously resolved a case through AIER, any subsequent offence of the
same or a similar nature will normally be managed under the formal procedures in this Code of
Practice.
C.8 Templates and supporting documentation
C.8.1 The University may issue templates to support consistent operation of AIER, including:
a) an eligibility checklist;
b) a Student acknowledgement form; and
c) confirmation of completion of the educative programme.

Page 21 of 21
