Acceptable use of Gen AI tools
(students)

Context
BPP recognises that there are many available ways of accessing Generative AI (GenAI) tools such as
ChatGPT, Microsoft CoPilot, Bard and Claude as examples. These are publicly available to access,
usually with a simple sign up using an email address or Google ID. BPP also recognises that these
tools may be of use to students wishing to experiment with GenAI and that students may well be
tempted to use them to enhance productivity.
This document sets out some contexts for use by students and identifies what would be considered
acceptable and unacceptable use, explaining why this is the case.
Throughout this document we refer to GenAI tools or ‘free-to-use’ GenAI tools meaning any tool not
specifically developed by or licenced to use by BPP. This includes both the free version of a tool like
ChatGPT, or ChatGPT+ which a user may pay for on a personal account.
Students may be given access to Generative AI tools through an institutional licence, and this will be
accessed through Single Sign On (SSO) using BPP credentials where it is granted.
1. General principles
1.1. The Generative AI Awareness HUB course outlines the importance of maintaining the
integrity of BPP Intellectual Property (IP), the confidentiality of BPP and Client Data, and
ensuring that we comply with GDPR regulations and data protection protocols.
1.2. The following are general principles of what would constitute an unacceptable student use
of a GenAI tool and could possibly lead to a case for Academic Misconduct or a breach of
your agreed Terms and Conditions signed in your Learning Contract.
Potential referral for Academic Misconduct
•

Submitting the undeclared outputs of Gen AI in summative work

•

Attempting to pass off work generated by Gen AI tools as your own work.

Potential breach of Terms and Conditions of contract under Student Misconduct policy
•

Using Gen AI tools in a way that would breach client confidentiality or would expose client
data.

•

Using Gen AI tools in a way that contravenes a clients own organisational policies.

•

Using Gen AI in a way that would bring BPP or its clients into disrepute.

1.3. The rest of this document sets out some acceptable use-cases of these free-to-access
GenAI tools as well as giving some examples that would be in breach of the above general
principles and guidance and therefore are unacceptable use-cases of free Gen AI tools. The
principles outlined in the document applies to any GenAI tool that is not part of the BPP
portfolio.

2. General unacceptable use
2.1. The following table outlines unacceptable use-cases for free-to-use GenAI tools and gives
examples of why these would be unacceptable.
2.2. If in doubt about using a Generative AI tool, please ask your tutor for further advice and
support.
#

Unacceptable Use

Example

2a

Apprentices must not submit the output of Gen
AI in any work submitted to their portfolio for
End Point Assessment (See “Generative AI in
BPP Apprenticeship Education: Position
Statement and guiding principles” – Available
in your Generative AI Awareness Hub Course
> BPP Policies and position statements)

Due to the varied nature of apprenticeship End Point
Assessment Organisations or EPAOs, BPP has taken the
universal decision not to allow outputs from Generative AI tools
to be included in the EPA portfolio on any apprenticeship
programme.
While a learner on an apprenticeship programme may use AI
in support of their learning, for example to draft ideas, structure
an outline for a report, conduct research, or get assistance
with coding, they must not submit the outputs as part of their
portfolio or attempt to pass off AI generated work as their own.
Apprentices who are on Degree Apprenticeships are
permitted to use generative AI in assessments leading to
module completion and module credit. This is in accordance
with the “Generative AI in BPP University Education: Position
statement and guiding principles”. However, they are not
permitted to submit the same information in their EPA portfolio
towards the achievement of their apprenticeship qualification.

2b

Input any data, such as company strategy or
financial figures that may be a breach of
confidentiality, data or privacy.

This could be subject to action under the Student Misconduct
policy. BPP provides access to necessary software for you to
complete your studies and this will have been approved for
use. If in doubt, please take advice from your tutor.

2c

Paraphrasing the output of generative AI to
avoid arousing suspicion of AI use or deceive
a marker

Unless AI is explicitly allowed in a summative assessment and
written into the brief, any attempts to disguise the use of AI
would be subject to Academic Misconduct. Please consult with
your tutors if in doubt.

2d

Simple copy and paste of Gen AI outputs for
assessment submission

Copying and pasting from Generative AI tools shows no skill,
understanding or processing of information. It does not
demonstrate that you have a grasp of your subject or topic and
is often very obviously ‘AI generated’ copy.

2e

Write a speech that forms the basis of a viva,
advocacy exam or other assessed
presentation where this is not explicitly allowed
in the presentation instructions

You must not use AI to generate copy where your real-time
oral speaking skills are being assessed. This includes scripts,
slides, or other aides to prompt the oratory performance.

Use Gen AI to generate any content where
spoken or written language skills are to be
assessed

Where English language skill and understanding is being
explicitly tested, either written or spoken, AI must not be used
in any of the process.

2f

ChatGPT or other Gen AI tools will not be there when you are
in court doing your summing up to the jury… Nor will it be
there when you are standing up at a board meeting presenting
your findings and convincing the board that your research is
solid.

Any student suspected of using AI in such a presentation
will have their application refused, their visa turned down
or simply be failed at the test.

Table 2: Unacceptable use-cases of free-to-use GenAI tools

3. Recommendations
3.1. The following will not lead to any penalties or are classed as ‘unacceptable’, however BPP
strongly recommend that you do not use any Gen AI tools in the following situations for the
reasons provided.
#
3a

Advisory: Do not use the AI in the following
ways
Provide mental health advice or counselling or
therapy services

Example
BPP provides a support service for all students and
our teams are staffed by fully qualified professionals.
Any student requiring Mental Health support,
counselling or just wants to talk to someone should
contact us at safeguarding@bpp.com or call in office
hours 9-5.30 excluding public holidays on 07464 542
636
Full Support Services information can be found here
Student Support.

Table 3: Recommendations against specific uses of Gen AI tools

4. Acceptable Use in Assessment Briefs
4.1. The following table outlines examples of acceptable use-cases for free-to-use GenAI tools
that may be allowed in an assessment situation.
4.2. In each case, the specific use of AI will be explicitly mentioned in the assignment brief.
4.3. In all summative assessment you must check to see if the use of generative AI has been
explicitly permitted in your assignment brief. If it has, then you must declare your use of AI
on the coversheet that will be provided to you by your school administration team or tutor.
4.4. If there is no explicit mention being allowed to use AI in your summative assessment brief,
then you must not use AI in any part of the final submission.
4.5. Any use of examples 4a-4c from the table below without explicit mention in the
assignment brief may lead to your submission being flagged for potential academic
misconduct.

#
4a

Acceptable use only if explicitly
mentioned in assignment brief
Paraphrasing and summarising own
written work to support the development
or structure of an assignment.

Example
You can use spelling, grammar-checking software and
thesauri to assist you in your writing. Some of these may be
AI powered and will help you to identify and correct
grammatical errors and spelling mistakes. However, you
should not use any software to rewrite sentences or make
substantive changes to your original work unless conditions
in the assignment brief explicitly allows it.
Tools like Grammarly and QuillBot allow users to rewrite text
using AI which will make suggestions on how to improve the
wording of the text. These tools are free to use and
incorporate AI. They can be added as extensions in Chrome
Browser to allow editing on-the-fly. You can also write or
upload text into a GenAI tool directly and prompt it to redraft
the text in a specific style or according to specific guardrails
(instructions like ‘write in British English’, ‘write in the third
person singular’).

4b

Drafting framework for argument/critique

Where it is explicitly allowed, you may use a generative AI
tool to help you structure an argument or critique that then
forms the foundation from which to write your own argument
or critique.
You could ask a general query of the key points of a topic
and ask an AI to provide you with the main arguments in the
following way:
“You will act as an expert in generative AI tools, mainly
ChatGPT, Bard and Claude. You will compare and contrast
the differences in each platform and summarise the main
differences in a thematic analysis. You will then provide me
with a structure for writing a critique of the 3 platforms in
language that could explain this to a 10 year old. You will
write in British English spelling and grammar.”

4c

Assignment planning

Where explicitly allowed in the assignment brief, you are
able use Gen AI tools to suggest frameworks on which you
can structure your assignment. By outlining the topic of the
assignment and the question being asked, you can ask AI to
provide a logical order for the main topics you wish to
include in your assignment.
Prompt 1 “Using the following question as a prompt to
develop a framework for writing, provide me with a structure
and logical order for the writing that covers the topics that I
provide you with in a follow up prompt. The question to
structure is: ‘XXXXXXX’. You will wait for me to provide you
with the topics in the next prompt”

Prompt 2 “You will cover the following topics in your
framework and integrate them in a logical way that flows
ending in a conclusion. [topic 1, [topic 2], [topic 3] etc…”
Alternatively, you are able upload your draft assignment and
ask AI to structure the work in a logical flow to provide you
with an alternative draft for your consideration. If you do
this, you must make sure that the AI does not significantly
change the actual words you have written as this would not
be acceptable.

Table 4: Potential Acceptable use-cases of free-to-use Gen AI for students where explicitly allowed in an
assignment brief, with examples

5. General Acceptable Use
5.1. The following table outlines general examples of acceptable use-cases for free-to-use GenAI
tools that may support you in the learning journey.

#

General Acceptable Use

Example

5a

Assisting with research, analysis of
papers or data in the public domain

Non-approved Gen AI tools can conduct research and find
papers that may be relevant to your studies. Caution should
be exercised as many relevant papers sit behind paywalls
that will not be accessible by an AI tool leading you to
search a much smaller pool of resources. For example, you
cannot search WestLaw, a legal database of case studies
using AI tools:
“To access cases on robbery and intent in the WestLaw
legal databases, you would need to sign in to their platform.”
Output from ChatGPT +
Gen AI tools can however provide you with a ‘first pass’
approach to finding useful information that may support
your research. For example, you could upload 3 papers or
documents that are in the public domain that relate you your
subject/problem/assignment and ask ChatGPT to provide a
summary of the contrasting points and evidence.
Additionally, BPPs Library service is the gateway to
academic research and through your BPP account you will
have access to 1000’s of journals, periodicals, books and
databases and should always be your first point of call.

5b

Discussion for self-reflection

You are allowed to use Gen AI tools to upload your own
writing and thoughts to begin a discussion or self-reflection
with the AI to gain insight into your writing. For example you
could write a prompt that references a specific model of
reflection to gain a deeper insight of your work:
“You will act as an expert in reflective models for selfimprovement and insight. Using the “four F’s of active
reviewing” reflective model, analyse the account of my
experience I am about to upload and provide me with some
reflective insight on my experience indicating where the
Facts, Feelings, Findings and Future align with my account
of my experience. Make suggestions as to how I could learn
from this reflection using the model.”

5c

Providing feedback on enhancements to
your own written work

It is acceptable to ask Gen AI tools to provide feedback and
suggest improvements to your own written work. You can
prompt the AI to assess your own work against how well it
meets the learning outcomes and make recommendations
for where you could improve the work.
Caution should be exercised against the recommendations
and feedback from a 3rd party AI tool however as the AI
does not have the full context of your assignment, the

learning content you are expected to have covered in your
study or the marking criteria that will be used to assess your
work.
No responsibility can be accepted by BPP for a student
using an AI tool to enhance their work and then not
achieving an expected grade when submitted.
All marking is by academic judgement and therefore not
subject to academic appeal. Please consult with your
academic regulations for further information.
As an initial feedback tool however, it may be able to
provide you with some pointers for improvement.
“You will act as an academic tutor who is an expert in
[topic]. You will be able to analyse an upload of my draft
written work and provide feedback against the following
learning outcomes.
1.

Outcome one

2.

Outcome two

You will identify 3 strengths in my writing against these
learning outcomes and identify 3 areas for improvement
against each outcome.”
5d

Help with initial ideas or brainstorming

Gen AI tools are great at helping kick start a thought
process or to generate ideas for a topic for discussion. You
can start by asking them to gather information on a specific
topic and then to generate some themes to explore.
“You will act as an expert in [topic]. What are the current
ideas and thinking from thought-leaders in [topic]? How
could I use this knowledge from thought-leaders to explore
a new angle on developing a [product/service/information
piece]?”
“You will act as an expert in data analysis. What are the
current ideas and thinking from thought-leaders in data
analysis? How could I use this knowledge from thoughtleaders to explore a new angle on developing an
information piece for a blog?”

5e

Supporting you to develop your coding
skills through advice of coding structure
and syntax where this is not an
assessed skill or intended learning
outcome.

By prompting Gen AI tools to act as an expert in a particular
coding language, you can get support with coding and
syntax writing. Caution should be used that the Gen AI tool
may not be familiar with the latest updates to software as
typically software and coding frameworks will get updated
more frequently than the Large Language Model (LLM)
training that the Gen AI tool is using. This is known as the
‘cut-off date’ of an LLM training model.
You should test all code generated by AI as often it will
make suggestions or hallucinate functions that don’t exist in
the programming framework. You can mitigate for this in the
prompt to some extent, but you should also have a basic
working knowledge of the framework and coding syntax to
be able to check it.
“You will act as an expert in coding Excel functions and
syntax. You will provide me with solutions to problems that I
post to you. You will correct or adapt code that I provide to
you. I will refer to column and rows in this way [column],
[[row]]. You will provide any coding corrections or
suggestions using ‘code snippets’ that I can then cut and
paste into Excel. You will not attempt to guess functions or
code if you don’t know. You will clearly say ‘I don’t know’ or
‘this is a suggestion of what might work’ if you are not sure
of the correct function syntax.”

Table 5: Acceptable use-cases of free-to-use Gen AI for students with examples

6. Further questions
6.1. For further information on AI use-cases, application of AI in learning, please contact
GenAI@bpp.com
End of document

Quick reference sheet of Acceptable and Unacceptable Use Cases of Generative AI tools
Details and an explanation of each case are contained on later pages in this document.

Unacceptable Use At Any Time
(may lead to cases of Potential Academic Misconduct, or Student Misconduct)
Apprentices must not submit the output of Gen AI in any work submitted to their portfolio for End Point
Assessment (See “Generative AI in BPP Apprenticeship Education: Position Statement and guiding principles”
– Available in your Generative AI Awareness Hub Course > BPP Policies and position statements)
Input any data, such as company strategy or financial figures that may be a breach of confidentiality, data or
privacy
Paraphrasing the output of generative AI to avoid arousing suspicion of AI use or deceive a marker
Simple cut and paste of Gen AI outputs for assessment submission
Write a speech that forms the basis of a viva, advocacy exam or other assessed presentation where this is not
explicitly allowed in the presentation instructions
Use Gen AI to generate any content where spoken or written language skills are to be assessed

Acceptable Use Only Where Explicitly Mentioned in Assessment brief
Paraphrasing and summarising own written work to support the development or structure of an assignment
Drafting framework for argument/critique
Assignment planning

General Acceptable Use Outside of Assessment
Assisting with research, analysis of papers or data in the public domain
Discussion for self-reflection
Providing feedback on enhancements to your own written work
Help with initial ideas or brainstorming
Supporting you to develop your coding skills through advice of coding structure and syntax where this is not
an assessed skill or intended learning outcome.
Assisting with research, analysis of papers or data in the public domain
Translating content to or from English, excluding any personal, client or business confidential content
Creation of unique images and graphics for use in presentations or documents
Create subtitles, voice to text transcripts of video lessons ensuring no personal, client-specific or businessconfidential information is included in the video

Table 1: Summary reference sheet of acceptable and unacceptable use cases of Generative AI tools
