
Generative Artificial Intelligence (GenAI) is a rapidly evolving field of developing machine intelligence to replicate, and in some cases, exceed human cognitive capacities. The most prominent techniques in AI that have risen to wider attention are machine learning, large language models, and natural language processing which, when prompted by user input, can produce seemingly intelligent responses replicating that of human interaction.
GenAI software, such as ChatGPT, Google Bard, and Microsoft CoPilot, make use of Large Language Models (LLMs) and Natural Language Processing which, when prompted by user input, can produce human-like responses that simulates human intelligence. The more users engage with, and contribute to these platforms, the more efficient they become in answering queries and providing in-depth, unique responses to user prompts. However, the user should be aware that the information these responses are based on, and the data that the LLMs have access to, is often not clearly referenced, leading inaccuracies and difficulties citing valid evidence. It may also contain significant biases. As a result, while these tools can -- if engaged with critically and responsibly -- provide useful responses, there are legitimate ethical concerns about their level of accuracy and the free use of information and data.  
Building Minds in the Age of Machines 
Building Minds in the Age of Machines
 is a discussion paper exploring how Cambridge might respond to the rapid adoption of generative AI in education. It brings together evidence on student use and the effects of AI on learning, reviews work already under way across Cambridge and approaches taken by peer institutions, and proposes a foundations-first framework that combines protected opportunities for students to develop independent judgement with structured, critical use of AI. Its aim is to support a coordinated University-wide conversation and identify practical next steps for teaching, supervisions, assessment, access to tools and guidance, while recognising disciplinary differences and the need to revisit our approach as the evidence and technology evolve.
Please download the latest version below:
minds-in-the-age-of-machines-public-v1.pdf
(198.48 KB)
General Principles of the use of Generative AI
When using GenAI tools and websites, please consider the following guiding principles:
Generative AI tools produce answers that may contain social biases and stereotypes depending on the information it has access to, and the prompts provided.
Remain aware of the potential privacy and data implications in using tools    without due care. Some tools may store or otherwise use information provided to train their language models and you should not share anything personal or sensitive.
Understand the ethical and moral implications of using information produced by GenAI tools as they often have access to vast sources of information and  with limited attribution or citations, you may not be able to determine the reliability and authenticity of generated outputs.
Be cautious of extended use and be sure you are using the right tool for the right job. Due to the severe environmental impact of power- and water-use when generating images, audio and text from GenAI tools you should take care to use the tool only as and when necessary and be as efficient as possible to mitigate these effects.
Acknowledge use of GenAI if it is used to make a significant and unrevised contribution to a substantive or impactful piece of work.
Take responsibility for ensuring any use of GenAI is conducted reasonably, lawfully, and in conjunction with relevant University policies and procedures.
How does it affect me?
The University of Cambridge broadly permits the appropriate use of GenAI tools and related software, however, due to the variety of disciplines and research areas present at the institution, there is need for more nuanced guidance at local levels. You should always check specific usage guidance with relevant areas of the University. Below are quick access links to resources, either located on this site or elsewhere within the University, that relate to some specific use-cases.  
Students
Students are permitted to make appropriate use of GenAI tools to support their personal study, research and formative work. Appropriate use is better defined locally by Department, Faculty, or College depending on the context and you should always check with a member of staff to be sure you know how you are able to use these tools for your education. 
General guidance for use of GenAI is available
 as well as 
specific guidance for assessment-related queries
.  
Staff
Staff are permitted to make appropriate use of GenAI tools to support their own work  and can find 
general guidance on staff use of GenAI
, and 
specific assessment-related guidance
, and further specific information in the information below.
General guidance on the use of AI for administrative work available from Information Compliance
Examiners
Examiners are permitted to use GenAI tools in the processing and formulation of their own comments and feedback, however, they are not permitted to upload, copy, or submit student work to GenAI or other similar tools.
Examiner’s use of AI in assessment
Supervisors
Further guidance and support about the use of GenAI in Undergraduate Supervisions
.
Can't find what you're looking for?
The information provided here presents a consensus and understanding for the University of Cambridge but guidance, support, and information may vary at more local levels within Schools, Departments, Faculties and Colleges. The 
Blended Learning Service
 is available to support local conversations and decision-making where appropriate and we welcome you to get in touch if you have further questions or concerns. 
info@blendedlearning.cam.ac.uk
Related Links
Russell Group Principles on the of generative AI in education
Office of External Affairs and Communication AI Guidance

