Generative AI guidance

Welcome to your AI guidance. We are having some problems with this webpage at the moment. If you followed a link to get here you may not be seeing all the content.

To see the full guidance visit students.canterbury.ac.uk/study/study support and platforms and go to Generative AI guidance.

Learn how you can use generative artificial intelligence (GenAI) at CCCU and what conditions the University has put on its use.

Using genAI at CCCU by Education and Student Success

Our approach to GenAI is educative, rather than punitive. 'Educative' means 'learning with and about'. Therefore, you can use GenAI tools to complement your learning but not to replace it. You may not use GenAI to produce work for assessment, unless explicitly told to do so by your module lead. Here, we explain how to use GenAI tools effectively, ethically and responsibly.

If you are unfamiliar with the language of GenAI, you can to refer to the glossary in the FAQs. There you will find definitions of key terms such as 'generative artificial intelligence', 'ethics,' and 'prompts'.

What is GenAI?

GenAI refers to a wide range of technologies that use artificial intelligence algorithms to create new content, such as text, images, audio, or code from written instructions called ‘prompts’. GenAI is built into applications we use every day for our study, work, and leisure, from ordering a cab, getting a parcel delivered, or tagging a person in a photo on social media.

For a short introduction to what GenAI is and how it works, watch this video.

Understanding genAI by CCCULearningSkillsTeam

Do I need to use GenAI?

Before we look at how GenAI can be used, consider whether you really need to use a GenAI tool for your task. GenAI has a large carbon footprint and consumes large amounts of energy and water, which have consequences for our environment. Being aware of these impacts helps us to make informed choices when it comes to our personal responsibility towards sustainable education and living.

Look at the slides below to learn about the environmental impact of using GenAI to write an email:

GenAI and Sustainability by Claudia Espana

We all have a responsibility to make environmentally conscious decisions. Having an awareness and understanding of the environmental issues in using GenAI allows us to make informed choices when it comes to our study.

Here are some examples of alternative uses of GenAI in your study:

I have a query about my subject Can you use a search engine for your query? Try using environmentally conscious search engines such as Search for Trees, Ecosia or Oceanhero.

I want to find information on my subject for my research Can you find the
information you want directly from a reliable, online database? You can
find the best databases for your subject using your library subject guide.

I want to check my reference list Can you access Cite Them Right? This website is used as the referencing standard for CCCU.

I need help with my time management Can you consult your Learning Developer for ways to improve your organisation and time management? You can book a tutorial with your subject Learning Developer through the Learning Skills Hub.

What can I use GenAI for?

GenAI has a broad range of uses. However, not all of these are appropriate for your study. This section explains appropriate and inappropriate uses.

You may use GenAI tools for:

- time management

- planning an assignment

- generating ideas for a topic

- learning new concepts (cross-check facts with reputable sources)

- developing critical writing skills such as editing and proofreading*

- self-directed study assistance

- creating revision materials

*See the FAQ 'How do I avoid academic misconduct when using digital tools for proofreading?' at the bottom of the guidance for more information.

You may not use GenAI applications for:

- producing work that will be assessed*

*your module assessment will be rated 1-5 using the Artificial Intelligence Assessment Scale (AIAS) found in your module handbook. If your assessment is specifically and explicitly designed to use GenAI it will be rated 3, 4 or 5 and this will be written into the module handbook. Your module leader will offer you further guidance.

Case studies of acceptable use of GenAI

It can be difficult to know what is acceptable use of GenAI. These slides show fictional case studies to give examples of acceptable and unacceptable uses of GenAI at University. Click through the slide show to learn where the students' actions sit on the scale of acceptability.

Case studies discussing the line of acceptable use of AI by CCCULearningSkillsTeam and Education and Student Success

Research and GenAI

GenAI can be a powerful tool for enhancing your research capabilities. However, these benefits should be balanced against the risks and it is important not to become dependent on GenAI for thinking. GenAI can be useful as a research assistant or learning partner; it can supplement your own research and critical thinking skills, not replace them.

If you are a final-year Undergraduate, Postgraduate research student,
or researcher, please also refer to our additional research guidance: Using generative AI in research: A checklist

Gen Ai and Research by Claudia Espana

Conducting research using GenAI

GenAI tools, when used appropriately and thoughtfully, can be very useful for research. They can retrieve data, summarise it, present it in a variety of formats, allow you to manipulate and tweak the data, and they can do all of this very quickly. The instructions or questions that you put into a GenAI chatbot or image generator are called 'prompts'.

Here are some steps you can take to use search prompts effectively and ethically.

using genAI effectively and ethically for searching by CCCULearningSkillsTeam

Triangulation of research

AI-generated information and data should be cross-verified with other sources, methods, or theories to ensure accuracy and reliability. To verify sources and references generated using AI tools, it’s important to carry out further research using reading lists/recommended sources, and traditional, retrieval-based search tools such as Google Scholar, LibrarySearch, relevant online resources, and databases.

Triangulation is a research technique that involves cross-verifying information from multiple sources. It enhances the validity and credibility of research findings. The poster below shows how GenAI tools relate to literature searching practices.

Triangulation by CCCULearningSkillsTeam

Evaluating information

Whilst helpful, GenAI does not know anything. GenAI
tools often produce content with a confident, authoritative style.
However, this content is produced by algorithms based on probability,
not a person with the ability to think, understand, or critically
evaluate. You are always the best judge of what is appropriate or
relevant, so view any information given or content generated with
caution and a critical eye.

Your work should always strike a balance between your ideas and research, and ideas of others. An over-reliance on GenAI may hinder your own critical skills development. You might use GenAI to help you to develop ideas or identify relevant sources during the research process, but you should analyse outputs and integrate them with your work in a thoughtful way, acknowledging the work of others with accurate in-text citations and referencing.

For guidance on thinking critically about the information you use, watch this video that explains using the BREAD tool developed
by one of CCCU's Learning and Research Librarians, David Bedford. The
BREAD tool can also be applied to GenAI, as you can see in the graphic
below.

The bread Process by CCCULearningSkillsTeam

Producing work with GenAI

GenAI tools can produce images, text, code, sound, video, and many other outputs. But they do not have an imagination of their own; they create content based on probability from your prompts. Although their output can provide initial ideas or inspiration, you should use your own creativity to build upon these ideas, whatever the medium. Your tutors value originality and creativity.

Your module leads may use the Artificial Intelligence Assessment Scale (AIAS) to 'rate' your module assessments according to how much GenAI interaction they will allow for your assessments. This will be communicated to you through your module handbook and assessment guidance.

Always check and follow the guidance provided by your lecturers if you are considering using GenAI for your academic work.

Written work (essays, reports, and dissertations)

GenAI can make language learning more effective and more accessible; it can be engaging and fun. Using GenAI tools can enhance the development of academic writing skills by offering a more sophisticated self-directed practice. However, they should not be used to replace your written work, by copying content or to prevent you developing your writing by uncritically accepting corrections or edits to your work.

GenAI chatbots are trained to be generalist. Whilst they can mimic particular writing styles, the text they produce is rarely nuanced and specific enough to provide academic writing of the level required at University.

Remember that to use GenAI tools with integrity, use must be declared and fully referenced.

Click through the slides below for examples on using GenAI to develop your written work and for some example prompts. For further guidance on academic writing skills, visit the Learning Skills Hub.

Brainstorm by CCCULearningSkillsTeam

Presentations (slides and posters)

GenAI tools can be very helpful for preparing visual aids for presentations. They can be used to produce images, infographics, and visually appealing layouts for slides. Be aware that image generation is also subject to bias and inappropriacy. See the section on image generation below for more information.

Writing for speech is different to writing essays or reports. As you will be speaking the words out loud, you will need to adapt to shorter sentences that suit the cadence of your voice. GenAI tools can help to shorten and simplify sentences for speech, or transcribe your speech so you can refine it further. However, ensure you retain the academic detail necessary to meet your learning outcomes and do not over-simplify.

Only use GenAI to produce work for assessed presentations with the explicit permission of your module lead. Ensure the content is derived from your own research and you have thought about it critically.

Remember that to use GenAI tools with integrity, use must be declared and fully referenced.

Visit the Learning Skills Hub for further guidance on presentations and posters.

Spelling, punctuation, and grammar (SPaG)

The 'dos' of using GenAI for SPaG

- identify common errors in your work

- ask for an explanation/example of how to correct errors

- define or translate words for English comprehension

- correct or suggest appropriate SPaG

*always cross-reference GenAI suggestions for accuracy

The 'do nots' of using GenAI for SPaG

- generate or extensively edit work for assessment

- overly rely on tools at the expense of learning

- accept corrections uncritically

- translate or rewrite blocks of text

The most common use of GenAI tools is to correct spelling, grammar, and punctuation (SPaG). However, we have all experienced an incorrect auto-correct! It is important to recognise that GenAI tools for spelling, punctuation, and grammar cannot replace learning grammar and writing skills. It is a requirement of University education that you graduate with advanced writing skills.

The good news is that GenAI chatbots make excellent tutors in this area. Using the GenAI chatbot in this way will help you shift your focus from an emphasis on accuracy and correction to learning and development.

Ask a chatbot to identify the common SPaG errors in your work, rather than correct them. Then ask for an explanation of how to correct those errors and make the corrections yourself. You can return the text to the chatbot and see if it has further recommendations. Some tools provide reports, which you can use to improve your writing and avoid the same mistakes in the future.

Be sure to specify that you want the rules of British English, or your work will be Americanised. Do not accept suggestions for words for which you do not know the meaning. The vocabulary suggested by some GenAI tools can be invented or used entirely out of context.

Remember that to use GenAI tools with integrity, use must be declared and fully referenced.

For further guidance, visit the Learning Skills Hub and the section on Writing and referencing.

Image generation

GenAI tools can generate images and artwork from written text prompts. These images might provide inspiration or starting points for your own projects.

In the graphic below, you will find some examples of potential uses for AI generated imagery.

Design by CCCULearningSkillsTeam

As with text generated by AI, outputs are dependent on the data the tool is trained with. This means that any biases, assumptions, stereotypes, or other problematic content present in the data will be reflected in the images produced.

- It can be difficult to create prompts which produce the exact image required.
- Image generators may also produce low quality images, 'strange' compositions, or images where details are wrong, for example errors in images of hands or eyes are common.
- The data used to train the algorithm will likely comprise images with registered copyrights or trademarks. It is prudent to look out for watermarks, copyright, and trademark symbols and not to re-use images drawn from this content. Ensure you do not perpetuate bias and stereotyping that is offensive and harmful, for instance, around gender, race, and disability.
- Also, be cautious of the potential for illegal, offensive, or exploitative images being generated.
- Some tools have strict content rules for image creation (e.g. relating to violence, drugs, or politics) and may prohibit content based on controversial topics, so some users complain of restricted creativity.

Computer code

GenAI tools such as GitHub Copilot can be useful for developing computer code. However, lecturers will be assessing your ability to create and modify code, problem solve and understand coding concepts, so use these tools for learning.

As with text and images, GenAI coding tools work on probability and may struggle with understanding nuances and subtleties in user queries or project requirements. They may not always provide effective solutions to complex problems. The quality of responses can vary significantly based on the query's complexity and specificity.

Other limitations may include:

- Generating incorrect or inefficient code suggestions. Ensure your prompts are clear to generate useful responses.
- Accuracy depends heavily on the context provided in the existing code.
- Suggestions may not always align with the latest coding best practices.
- May not be as effective with less popular programming languages or frameworks.
- The GenAI tool might suggest code snippets that closely resemble existing public code, raising potential licensing and copyright concerns. It may be picked up by similarity software either from other sources or other students’ work.

Always view AI generated or modified code critically and ask yourself if it is efficient and gives the desired output. Most importantly, you should be able to understand and explain how the code works, rewriting, or modifying the code as necessary.

GenAI tools should be used in the appropriate way to support your
work and should not be relied upon too heavily. Always ensure you check
the specific criteria for each assignment and give a reference for the code in your work.

Look at the poster below for some ideas on how you could use GenAI to help with coding work.

computer coding by CCCULearningSkillsTeam

Referencing and declaring the use of GenAI

It is always important to differentiate between our own original work and what comes from elsewhere. In academic writing we do this via a system of citations and references. You can find out more about referencing on the Learning Skills Hub.

We firmly advocate that you use reliable, academic sources for research. Where you use GenAI, you must acknowledge its influence on your work by acknowledging and referencing appropriately. We recommend you follow the links GenAI tools provide to their sources and verify the information’s accuracy and reliability.

Always verify GenAI outputs' truthfulness and accuracy.

Always acknowledge the use of GenAI in your work using the relevant statement provided in your module handbook.

Always reference GenAI in your work. Do not submit
work produced in whole or part by GenAI tools, either verbatim or after
paraphrasing, without citation. You can learn more about citing and
referencing GenAI on Cite Them Right.

There are several different referencing systems used across the University, depending on the subject you are studying. You can find out which referencing system is used by your academic department by checking your module handbook.

acknowledging the use of ai by CCCULearningSkillsTeam

Risks and limitations

There are legal, ethical, and copyright considerations when using any AI generated content. If problematic content is present in the training data, there is the potential to reproduce harmful content. Always proofread, fact-check, and critique appropriately.

Academic integrity and plagiarism

Academic integrity is about our responsible sharing and use of information created by others. When you use information from another source, you must always give credit to the author of that work, including information that is generated by AI. Without acknowledgement of the use of a GenAI tool, you risk academic misconduct.

You must acknowledge all use of GenAI in the preparation for assessment and reference its direct use correctly (see the section on Referencing above).

Your module lead will provide further detailed guidance in your Module Handbook.

You engage in academic misconduct if you:

- Submit work produced in whole or part by GenAI, either verbatim, or paraphrased, without acknowledgment, citation and referencing.

- Use GenAI platforms to undertake data analysis, evaluation or calculations without acknowledgement.

For more information see CCCU's Academic integrity and misconduct page.

Ensure you are familiar with CCCU’s Academic Integrity Policy.

For further guidance, have a look at the Learning Skills Hub on Academic integrity and plagiarism.

Accuracy, fabrication and misinformation

GenAI tools are known to produce false, inaccurate, or misleading information, called ‘hallucinations’. Always apply your critical thinking to any AI-generated output and check the accuracy and currency of information using the BREAD tool.

Many versions of GenAI tools are ‘live trained’, meaning they are connected to the internet and are being continually trained on their users’ prompts. Others are closed systems. Both situations can affect the accuracy of the responses generated in different ways. Be aware of these limitations and their impact on the quality of the responses generated.

GenAI platforms don't take responsibility for the output they produce; you can read the terms and conditions of a platform to verify this. Any output generated should be cross-referenced for accuracy, using authoritative sources, by you as the author of your work.

Find out more about how to identify the source of an online image on the Learning Skills Hub.

Testing accuracy

Try asking a GenAI chatbot multiple times and/or using multiple GenAI chatbots about a topic you already know very well. Compare how it responds on different platforms and at different times. Try spotting any errors in the response. After you have asked a question, you could also try asking, 'What are the potential limitations of this information?', 'How could this be interpreted in another way?' or 'How would you critique this text that I have produced?'

A weakness of GenAI is it's very easy to manipulate – try telling a chatbot its output is incorrect and it will often apologise and give a different answer. Always bear in mind that GenAI cannot think for itself and its outputs are based on algorithms, not knowledge or understanding.

Bias, assumptions, and stereotypes

It is essential to know that GenAI platforms may generate answers to your prompts based on the data lakes they have been trained on. Where these data lakes contain biases or misinformation, the output of these platforms may perpetuate these. This can include:

- Information from groups seeking to influence people

- Domination of the white, male perspective, and Western culture

- Lack of representation from ethnic minorities and their cultures

- Assumptions of male and female roles in society

- Offensive and abusive material

It is good practice to verify outputs by cross-referencing with reliable sources to ensure that they do not contain bias, misinformation, or unverifiable information.

Copyright

In the UK, copyright law gives a person ownership rights over the things they create unless a copyright exemption exists. GenAI produces outputs based on existing works and training data that may include exact reproductions or illegal copies. This means that, when using GenAI without proper accreditation, you could inadvertently plagiarise or breach the copyright of someone’s work. The Data (Use and Access) Bill is currently under review in the UK so this is developing area of the law. Be aware that this is a complicated and controversial arena, with many arguing that GenAI breaches copyright rules and undermines authors, artists and creators.

Some countries, including Denmark, are proposing allowing citizens to copyright their own faces and voices to help protect their privacy and deter identity theft using GenAI.

We advise that you do not place copyrighted information into GenAI platforms for processing, as the platforms may use it to train their models, which is currently heavily contested. Copyright also relates to your course notes, assessments, slides, etc. and for generating images and videos to recreate close copies of copyright outputs.

You can find out more about the intellectual property and copyright concerns that might arise when using genAI tools by referring to information provided by the National Centre for AI.

- Do not place copyrighted information into GenAI platforms for processing. This includes your course notes, assessments, slides and other content produced by University staff. Do not put these into GenAI platforms unless the academic concerned gives written permission.

- Do not request that the GenAI platform creates images and videos that are close copies of copyrighted outputs.

Ethics

GenAI tools pose ethical issues that you should consider when using them for work, research, and leisure. Many issues are still emerging so these are to prompt you to think carefully about how you choose to engage with the tools. Some are discussed in more depth elsewhere in this guidance:

- Bias in training data, including on gender, race, religion, sexuality, disability, and geo-politics, among others.

- The use of workers in poorer economies for data-labelling tasks. Data-labelling is the process by which humans 'tag' raw data to give it context for that machine-learning. This practice includes humans viewing and labelling offensive, illegal, and harmful internet content so that GenAI systems can learn not to reproduce it in their responses to users.

- The concentration of GenAI technology in a handful of private companies, mainly based in the USA.

- The carbon footprint resulting from increase in electricity use to supply the manifold increase in data centres to supply the AI industry and water usage to cooling servers in these centres poses a huge risk to sustainable decarbonisation and water-stressed areas. Not all GenAIs are equally polluting and more research in this area is needed.

- The unfairness inherent in un-critically using GenAI to complete assessed coursework or sensitive tasks in a work environment.

- The inequitable access to GenAI platforms within our University community, broadly and globally, creating a further divide between those who can afford to pay for the latest GenAI models and those who cannot. Over 1/3 of the world's population remain offline (UNESCO, 2025).

- Training GenAI on copyrighted images, texts, music, and code, which are then remixed/reproduced without compensation to the original creator.

- The role of academic researchers in 'cleaning' data originally accessed under not-for-profit licenses, which is then used by for-profit enterprises. Examples exist in the fields of facial recognition, photography, and video generation.

Privacy and data protection

Do not enter personally identifiable or sensitive information into GenAI platforms. Some platforms store the interactions, which may constitute a data breach under the Data Protection Act and UK GDPR 2018. This includes research data. If you need to report a data breach to our Information Governance team, use the data breach report form.

Under 18s are not currently permitted to use GenAI. If you are under 18 you may not legally use GenAI platforms without written parental permission. This includes Copilot, which is provided as part of the Microsoft365 suite. Speak to your Course Director to arrange permission.

Some tools, particularly those that are free to use, will request your permission to access and share user data. Always check the terms and conditions and the data privacy policy before subscribing, and ask yourself the following questions:

- How will this company use my data? e.g. for marketing or training.

- Who will they share my data with? e.g. which third parties?

- Is there an option for me to select which privacy settings I prefer? e.g. whether the information I enter will be shared with the AI model for training purposes or not.

It is essential to be aware of the terms and conditions section of the GenAI tools you are using, as each platform that provides these tools has its unique terms and conditions. Look out for provisions such as whether, by using these platforms, you are granting these platforms the right to use the content that you have entered as prompts and the output generated or whether your prompts will be utilised to train their algorithms.

You should always use caution when sharing personal or sensitive information online, including uploading photos.

Copilot

Microsoft’s Copilot offers commercial data protection through the University’s institutional licence. Your data will not be stored or used to train Microsoft or OpenAI’s models (the company that supplies GenAI capabilities to Microsoft).

To securely access Copilot log into copilot.microsoft.com using your CCCU credentials. You will see a shield symbol when you are successfully logged in.

You should always use caution when sharing personal or sensitive information online, including uploading photos.

Your wellbeing

Developing your reflective research and critical thinking skills is essential to your responsible use and consumption of GenAI outputs.

Deepfakes

GenAI tools are being used to produce deepfakes. These are text, images, or videos which have been digitally altered to deliberately mislead or spread false and defamatory information. Deepfakes can, and are being, used to target individuals and organisations by manipulating images and information posted on social media, or shared digitally. This can be very distressing for the individual(s) concerned. Deepfakes can be extremely difficult to detect, so it is important to view all online content critically and always check the source of any image, video, or information before you reuse or share.

If you have been affected by the inappropriate use of personal images or information, you can contact the University’s Student Wellbeing and Support Team.

Personal data security

It is advisable to never share personal, identifiable information with GenAI platforms, including your own photograph, unless you have checked and consented to the companies’ privacy policies. Do not share others’ personal, identifiable, or sensitive information with GenAI platforms unless you have their express consent. If you do so, you may be in breach of the UKs Data Protection Act 2018 and Europe’s GDPR laws. You may also inadvertently put yourself or others at risk.

Wellbeing

As we integrate GenAI into our daily lives, it is essential to consider its potential impact on our mental and emotional wellbeing. Whilst GenAI can be a valuable tool for enhancing productivity and creativity, it is important to maintain a healthy balance and be mindful not to become overly reliant on its responses or let the information it provides overly influence our own thoughts and decisions.

Whilst GenAI has become adept at mimicking human language and conversational patterns, it is crucial to maintain a sense of perspective and not attribute human emotions or intentions to GenAI responses. GenAI cannot replace human connection and social interaction. Social interaction and emotional connection with friends, family, and supportive individuals remains an essential aspect of our wellbeing.

Navigating the world of GenAI requires a balanced approach, embracing its potential whilst maintaining a sense of awareness and responsibility. By fostering healthy relationships with all technology, we can harness its power to enhance our lives without compromising our human connection and wellbeing.

If you feel that your use of technology, whether GenAI or other
digital technologies, is impacting on your mental health or wellbeing
and you would like to talk to someone about it, then get in touch with
CCCU’s Student Wellbeing and Support Team.

Frequently asked questions (FAQs)

Below are some common questions students have asked about using GenAI. Open the tabs to see the answers.

What does this mean? A glossary of keywords

Artificial intelligence (AI) and generative artificial intelligence (GenAI)
AI is the umbrella term for the technology and the systems created to think like humans. GenAI is a type of artificial intelligence that creates new content based on existing information (data) available online.

Artificial Intelligence Assessment Scale (AIAS)
The AIAS is a tool developed by Perkins, Furze, Roe & McVaugh (2024) to help educators 'code' the appropriate level of GenAI use in the development of work for assessment. All use of GenAI in assessment should be acknowledged and referenced.

Bias

Bias refers to the learned prejudices in the data that an AI has been trained on. For example, an AI may develop gender, racial, and/or political biases producing stereotypical and/or discriminative content.

Critical thinking

Being able to think critically means your ability to question and evaluate the information that is presented to you.

Ethics
Ethical use of GenAI is about giving consideration to bias, copyright and your academic integrity to ensure you use any GenAI tool with honesty, fairness, respect and responsibility.

GenAI tools
These are many programmes and platforms that embed artificial intelligence technology for you to use. An example of a GenAI tool is Microsoft Copilot.

Hallucinations
A hallucination occurs when the GenAI tool has created false or misleading information. This can happen because the data the GenAI tool used was incorrect or because the GenAI tool has spliced together information from multiple sources creating inaccurate content. This is why we always need to critically evaluate and cross reference any GenAI output.

Prompt engineering and prompts
A prompt is the instruction you give GenAI for it to generate content. This could be a sentence, a description, an order, or a question. Prompt engineering refers to the craft in creating brief, specific prompts for the best generated outcomes.

What can I not use GenAI for?

GenAI cannot be used in writing your assignments, unless it has been specified as a part of your assessment at levels 2-5 of the Artificial Intelligence Assessment Scale (AIAS) .

How can I reference the GenAI tool I have used in my work?

The referencing section of this guidance has advice and Cite Them Right provides guidance and examples for referencing GenAI. Make sure you use the referencing style for your course, found in your course handbook.

Does the University recommend any GenAI tools I can use for my work?

The University does not recommend or endorse any specific GenAI tools. GenAI should be used in accordance with the guidance given here.

Is there anyone I can speak to regarding the use of GenAI tools for my work?

Your lecturers are your first point of contact to discuss how you would like to work with GenAI to support your learning at University.

You can also contact your Learning Skills Team for further advice and guidance. The Academic Librarians can offer you guidance on your research and referencing, and your Learning Developer can provide advice on your assessments such as essays, reports, presentations and posters. You can learn more about the Learning Skills Team for your course and the support they offer on the Learning Skills Hub.

What are the consequences for ignoring this guidance on using GenAI?

There is a risk of academic misconduct and plagiarism if you choose not to follow the University guidance on using GenAI. For more information, please refer to the Academic Integrity pages on the Learning Skills Hub, or speak with your course Learning Skills Team for further advice and guidance.

How do I know if a platform or tool uses GenAI or not?

It is important to recognise a website or tool with GenAI integration so that we can identify when a GenAI has assisted with our work and apply the necessary checks (see the limitations and risks of using GenAI).

- Check the 'about' pages which should provide information about how the website operates and how the tool works. This usually appears under the description generated through a Google search.

- Look at the url or weblink. Some will have an address ending in '.ai' instead of '.com' or '.co.uk' for example, indicating it is AI powered.

- Look for an 'ask a question...' feature. This can be a give away because it will need to generate an answer.

Many websites and tools are now powered by GenAI such as Grammarly and Microsoft Word. If you are unsure, contact the IT Team for guidance.

How do I avoid academic misconduct when using digital tools for proofreading?

CCCU's Student Academic Integrity Policy outlines the principles that underpin fair assessment and ensures the quality of all academic awards made by the University. It tells you what is expected of you when you submit work for assessment, including the misuse of digital tools to enhance work.

Misuse of digital/ generative and other AI tools occurs when students use such tools (whether free or behind a paywall) to:

- augment their work in a misleading way and which enhances their work beyond their current stage of learning;

- to paraphrase without understanding the text or how it contributes to their work;

- to falsely insert references;

- to falsely inflate the range of academic or subject specific vocabulary.

These tools include, but are not limited to, ChatGPT, Quillbot, Gemini (formerly Bard), Grammarly, Claude, Copilot etc.

Speak to your Learning Developer for EAP for any queries regarding the use of digital tools for proofreading your English language.

Further information

- Academic integrity and misconduct
- Accessing and Understanding your Similarity Report
- Learning Skills Hub

Your feedback

Student GenAI Guidance Feedback Form

This document is owned by the Education and Student Success team. Thanks to the Student AI Working Group (CCCU staff and students) for their contributions to this guidance. Thanks to the Learning Skills Team for their continuing support to revise and update this guidance. Last updated: September 2025
