Generative Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Your Assessments
A Guide for Students
29th September 2023

Purpose
This document provides Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) for students on the use of generative
artificial intelligence in assessments/assignments.

What do generative artificial intelligence tools (e.g. ChatGPT) do?
These models are also known as Large Language Models. They are based on algorithms that
automatically generate content (e.g., texts, images) in response to questions or ‘prompts’. This
content sounds or looks as though it has been produced by humans.
Is it plagiarism to submit a piece of assessment that has been wholly or partially created
by an artificial intelligence tool?
Yes, this is plagiarism if you submit it as your own work. Assessments are designed to help you
learn and to assess what you have learned, so it is essential that your assessments are your own
work.
You must acknowledge the sources of any information or ideas that you draw on by referencing
properly. This is very clear in the DkIT Academic Integrity Policy and Procedures
(https://www.dkit.ie/about-dkit/policies-and-guidelines/academic-policies.html):
“Using generative artificial intelligence tools (e.g. ChatGPT) in an assessment unless explicitly
permitted to do so and with proper acknowledgement, is a form of plagiarism” (p.4).

Can I use a generative artificial intelligence tool, such as ChatGPT, to help me
prepare an assignment?
You can use these tools ethically to help you learn. For example, you could use them to help you
to draw up a study plan, to summarise information, to help narrow down a topic or to generate
flashcards or practice questions. You should not use them unethically to create some or all of your
assignments. In some cases, your lecturer may allow or even require you to use generative AI as
part of a learning activity or assessment. For example, you might be asked to critique an AIgenerated response to a question. This will be made clear in your assessment brief, and you
should always check with your lecturer before you use these tools.

1

If you use generative AI in an assignment, you do need to acknowledge this. If in doubt, ask your
lecturer or library. It is also your responsibility to check the accuracy of the information.

What happens if my lecturer allows the use of AI in an assessment?
If a lecturer permits the use of artificial intelligence (AI), the terms of this use will be included in
the assessment brief by the lecturer(s). The use of artificial intelligence will be “unrestricted”,
“restricted”, or “prohibited”. If you permitted to use AI, you will be asked to provide a declaration
of use in your submitted assessment.
This will:
•
•
•
•
•

Provide a written acknowledgment of the use of generative artificial intelligence.
Specify which technology/technologies were used.
Identify the prompts used.
Provide the resulting outputs.
Explain how the output was used in the submitted work (used directly or modified).

Declaration of Use Example
I acknowledge the use of [1] [insert AI system(s) and link(s)] to [2] [specific use of
generative artificial intelligence]. The prompts (generated on <date(s)>) used include [3]
[list of prompts]. The prompt outputs were as follows / are included in an appendix
(depending on volume) [4] [prompt outputs]/[appendix]. The output from the generative
artificial intelligence was used to [5][explain use].

I acknowledge the use of [1] ChatGPT (https://chat.openai.com/) to [2] generate materials
on background research for this assessment. The prompts (generated on 15th Sept 2023)
used include:
[3] Write a 50 word summary about the topic x. Write it in an academic style.
The prompt outputs are included in an appendix at the end of the assessment [4] [appendix].
The output from the generative artificial intelligence was [5] adapted and modified for the
final submission.
If use is permitted, and you decide not to use AI, you should include the following declaration in
your submitted assessment:
‘“No content generated by AI technologies has been used in this assessment”.’

Are there any disadvantages to using generative AI?
Yes. The content produced is not always accurate. The tools can produce false information or
‘hallucinations’. While some hallucinations will be easy to spot, others may appear very plausible.
For example, the content might include references that look good but do not exist. In some cases,
the content might be biased. Bias is widely recognised as a problem with many algorithms. This
is often the result of biases in the data used to train the software but may also be due to biases
being designed in.
2

Will my lecturer know if I use generative AI to produce an assignment?
Your lecturers are subject experts, and will spot issues like inaccuracies, false references and
inconsistent style. They will also be familiar with your participation in class and your work more
generally and will notice inconsistencies. New tools are available that aim to detect AI generated
content. While these are at an early stage, and further development and testing is needed, they
may be used as one of a number of indicators if further investigation is needed.
Everyone in higher education is very aware of the implications of generative AI for academic
integrity. Institutions have an obligation to uphold academic integrity and any suspected misuse
of AI to plagiarise will be investigated in the same way as any other suspected breach of academic
integrity. Please familiarise yourself with DkIT’s Academic Integrity Policy and Procedures
(https://www.dkit.ie/about-dkit/policies-and-guidelines/academic-policies.html).
Increasingly, lecturers are designing assessments that cannot be answered easily by generative
AI tools. Most importantly though, if you are not doing your own work, then you are not meeting
the learning outcomes needed for your course.

I’m not sure what is an ethical use of generative AI and what is not?
It’s ok to be unsure. Generative AI is a very new development and things are changing all the time
at a rapid pace. Policies and guidelines are updated regularly, so be sure to check the DkIT’s
Academic Integrity Policy and Procedures (https://www.dkit.ie/about-dkit/policies-andguidelines/academic-policies.html).
Remember that it is always unethical to use generative AI to produce work that you claim as your
own. This is plagiarism.
It is very important to talk to your lecturers and programme team – if in doubt, ask and make sure
that you follow the guidance given. There are other great sources of help and guidance including
the Student Learning and Development Centre (SLDC) and the Library.

Document History
Version
Number

Date
Approved

Approved By

Brief Description

1

29/09/2023

Academic Council (Meeting
No. 189).

Initial student guidance for
assessments.

3
