          Postgraduate Research Thesis Guidance

Purpose of Guidance
The guidance sets out standards for the format of postgraduate research theses to provide clarity and
consistency. This applies to theses submitted for assessment under the University’s Postgraduate
Assessment Regulations for Research Degrees. This guidance is not applicable to MSc by Research
students.

Scope: Guidance is not Mandatory
Postgraduate research students, supervisors of postgraduate research students, academic and professional
support staff involved with postgraduate research thesis submission.

                     Students are asked to contact their Graduate School office with
Contact              any queries about the format of a thesis that are not covered in
                     this guidance note.



Document control
          Version       Effective
                                       Equality impact assessment:           Last Reviewed:     Next Review:
Dates     Approved:     Date:
                                       23.05.12                              22.01.26           2029/30
          22.01.26      01.08.26

Approving authority                    Academic Policy and Regulations Committee (APRC)
                                       Degree Regulations and Programmes of Study
Related policies, procedures,          Code of Practice for Supervisors and Research Students
guidelines & regulations               Postgraduate Assessment Regulations for Research Degrees


                                       If you require this document in an alternative format please email
Alternative format
                                       academicpolicy@ed.ac.uk
Keywords                               Assessment, research assessment, thesis format
  Postgraduate Research Thesis Guidance

1. Submission of theses for assessment
1.1 Students are asked to submit their thesis for assessment electronically.

1.2 Every student must incorporate a declaration at the front of the thesis submitted for
assessment, stating:

   (a) that the thesis has been composed by the student, and
   (b) either that the work is the student’s own, or, if the student has been a member of a
       research group, that the student has made a substantial contribution to the work,
       such contribution being clearly indicated, and
   (c) that the work has not been submitted for any other degree or professional
       qualification except as specified, and
   (d) that any included publications are the student’s own work, except where indicated
       throughout the thesis and summarised and clearly identified on the declarations
       page of the thesis
   (e) (where relevant) any use of generative Artificial Intelligence (AI) in the composition
       of the thesis.

1.3 Appendix 1 includes exemplar signed declarations for use in theses.

1.4 Guidance for postgraduate research students regarding the use of generative AI is
provided on the University’s web pages.
Generative AI Guidelines for Postgraduate Research Students

2. Formatting of theses for assessment

2.1 Where there is a choice of character style or font, a sans serif font (for example,
Helvetica or Arial) should be used for the main text. Character size should be 12 points.

2.2 Text should be set to ensure an even spacing between words for any particular line.
Word division at the ends of lines (hyphenation) should be avoided if possible. Students
are expected to follow guidance on accessible formatting:
   • Creating accessible materials

2.3 The title page should have:
   • Title of thesis
   • Author’s name

And at the foot of the page:
  • Name of degree
  • The University of Edinburgh
  • Year of presentation*




                                              2
  Postgraduate Research Thesis Guidance
*The year of presentation refers to the year in which the thesis is submitted for
assessment. In the case of a thesis which is resubmitted, the year in which the thesis is
resubmitted should be shown as the year of presentation.

2.4 An abstract and lay summary should be included in the thesis after the title page. For
more information about the lay summary, see section 3 of this document.

2.5 A full table of contents should follow the abstract and include a list of tables,
photographs and any other materials.
2.6 Where diagrams, maps, illustrations or other images are included in the thesis, these
should be good quality and high resolution.

2.7 If you use third party material (images, photos, diagrams etc.) within the thesis, the use
must be fair and the material correctly attributed. Third party material is any material that is
not originally created by you and is borrowed from another source of origin. The use must
be limited to what is necessary for the purpose of your work, and it must not negatively
impact on the economic rights of the original work. This may mean limiting copying to
shorter extracts of a work.
   • University copyright guidance

2.8 We would recommend finding openly licensed content which can be freely shared
online.
    • Finding open content

2.9 For accessibility reasons, it is recommended to provide an alternative text to images.
Alternative text (“alt text”) is a machine-readable tag that describes an image in words if
the image cannot be displayed, for example for someone using a screen reader.
    • University accessibility guidelines, policy and legislation

2.10 Formatting of notes should be consistent, inserting the notes at the foot of the page,
or at the end of each chapter, or at the end of the thesis. All separate sections, for
example bibliography, list of abbreviations, should be identified on the contents page.

3. Abstract and lay summary
3.1 A lay summary must be incorporated at the beginning of the thesis submitted for
assessment, and must be included in the final version of the submitted thesis. Lay
summaries should conform to the formatting guidance in section 2 of this document. The
lay summary is not included in the word count for the thesis.

3.2 A lay summary is intended to facilitate knowledge exchange, public engagement and
outreach. It should be written in simple, non-technical terms that are easily understandable
by a lay audience, who may be non-professional, non-scientific and outside the research
area.



                                               3
  Postgraduate Research Thesis Guidance
3.3 Abstracts, particularly in science, engineering, medicine and veterinary medicine, may
be highly technical or contain scientific language that is not easily understandable to
readers outside the research area. Therefore, the lay summary is supplementary to the
abstract.

3.4 Students may seek advice on the lay summary at any point from their Principal
Supervisor.


4. Including publications in Postgraduate Research theses

4.1 There is no requirement in the assessment regulations for publications to be included
in theses. This guidance is for students who choose to include publications as a part of
their thesis. It is not for students who are matriculated for PhD by Research Publications,
for whom there are separate regulations and guidance.

4.2 All PhD theses must form a coherent body of interrelated work that shows the
student’s ability for critical analysis. Where publications are to be included in the thesis
submitted for assessment, they should in effect form a thesis chapter with introductory and
concluding text added to place the publication within the structure of the thesis (see
example below).

Example of chapter structure:
   o Chapter X
   o Introduction
   o Published journal manuscript*
   o Conclusion

*Published articles need not be reformatted and can be inserted, as they appear in the
publication.

4.3 Published journal articles cannot be expected to be subject to correction. However,
corrections the student may wish to make, or indicated by the thesis examiners, can be
dealt with in the introduction or conclusion of the chapter containing the publication.

4.4 Articles included in the thesis which have been submitted for pre-publication (for
example in pre-print servers such as bioRxiv, arXiv, SSRN etc) or for publication but which
have not been published, or which are in proof, will be included in a format comparable to
monograph thesis content. For example, text from unpublished or proof articles can be
copied and pasted to match the format of the body of the thesis.

4.5 The complete body of work submitted, including published articles, should be
equivalent to that expected of a monograph thesis and adhere to similar word lengths, as
laid out within University regulations and local discipline-specific guidance.




                                             4
  Postgraduate Research Thesis Guidance
4.6 It should be emphasised that while peer reviewing of publications is a good measure of
progress, it does not guarantee success at examination. The assessment of the standard
of the submitted thesis rests with the examiners. Examiners will assess the standard and
appropriateness of papers and publications included within a thesis.

4.7 Articles may not be included in the thesis for which students do not retain copyright,
except with permission from the copyright holder. As students are responsible for the
quality of the submitted thesis, it is therefore also the student’s responsibility to ensure that
the thesis complies with copyright law and advice should be sought in relation to copyright
implications. Open access papers with a Creative Commons licence can be included in a
PhD thesis without the need to seek permission from the journal. Supervisors may be able
to offer advice in relation to copyright matters.

4.8 Jointly or multiple-authored publications can be included but students must ensure
appropriate permission is obtained and their contribution is clearly indicated. Supervisors
will be able to advise on discipline-specific expectations.
4.9 The inclusion of journal articles is also permissible for other postgraduate research
degrees which are exit routes for the PhD, for example MPhil and MSc by Research.

5. Portfolios of musical compositions

5.1 Portfolios of musical compositions should be submitted digitally.

6. Thesis and non-textual elements for Practice-led MPhil and
   Doctorates

6.1 The thesis should follow guidance at 1-4 above. Final copies lodged in the Library will
contain a permanent record of the exhibit, attached to the thesis (see section 7, on Final
thesis submission).

7. Final thesis submission

7.1 The final version of the thesis is submitted electronically only. A declaration is not
required in the final version.
   • How to submit the final version of your PhD thesis

                                                                              22 January 2026




                                                5
  Postgraduate Research Thesis Guidance
Appendix 1 – Exemplar Signed Declarations for use in theses

Examples of a standard declaration:

   1. I declare that this thesis has been composed solely by myself and that it has not been
      submitted, in whole or in part, in any previous application for a degree. Except where
      states otherwise by reference or acknowledgment, the work presented is entirely my
      own.

   2. I confirm that this thesis presented for the degree of [degree sought], has
          i)     been composed entirely by myself
          ii)    been solely the result of my own work
          iii)   not been submitted for any other degree or professional qualification

   3. I declare that this thesis was composed by myself, that the work contained herein is
      my own except where explicitly stated otherwise in the text, and that this work has
      not been submitted for any other degree or processional qualification except as
      specified.
      Parts of this work have been published in [state previous publication].

Examples of a declaration including collaborative work:

   1. The data presented in this thesis was obtained in an experiment carried out by the
      [name of collaboration] in [location of experiment/where collaboration happened]. I
      played a major role in the preparation and execution of the experiment, and the data
      analysis and interpretation are entirely by own work. Any contributions from
      colleagues in the collaboration, such as diagrams or calibrations, are explicitly
      referenced in the text.
      I am aware of and understand the university’s policy on plagiarism and I certify that
      this thesis is my own work, expect where indicated by referencing, and the work
      presented in it has not been submitted in support of another degree or qualification
      from this or any other university or institute of learning.

   2. I declare that this thesis is an original report of my research, has been written by me
      and has not been submitted for any previous degree. The experimental work is almost
      entirely my own work; the collaborative contributions have been indicated clearly and
      acknowledged. Due references have been provided on all supporting literatures and
      resources.
      I declare that this thesis was composed by myself, that the work contained herein is
      my own except where explicitly stated otherwise in the text, and that this work has
      not been submitted for any other degree or professional qualification.

Example of a declaration including jointly authored publications:

                                             6
Postgraduate Research Thesis Guidance

1. I declare that the thesis has been composed by myself and that the work has not be
   submitted for any other degree or professional qualification. I confirm that the work
   submitted is my own, except where work which has formed part of jointly-authored
   publications has been included. My contribution and those of the other authors to this
   work have been explicitly indicated below. I confirm that appropriate credit has been
   given within this thesis where reference has been made to the work of others.
   The work presented in Chapter [chapter number] was previously published in
   [publication name] as [title of article] by [authors – clearly indicate which is the student
   and author of the declaration. If the supervisor is a co-author this should be clearly
   indicated as well]. This study was conceived by all of the authors. I carried out
   [description of student’s contribution]. [This paragraph should be repeated for each
   journal article included in the thesis.]




                                            7
