Edinburgh Napier University’s Position
on Generative Artificial Intelligence
Our Shared Commitment to Ethical and
Responsible Use
August 2025

Introduction
At Edinburgh Napier University, we are committed to preparing our students and staff
for an AI-integrated future while maintaining the highest standards and quality in
learning, teaching, assessment, research, academic integrity and ethical innovation.
Generative artificial intelligence (Gen AI) tools are now part of education, work, and
everyday life, bringing both opportunities and challenges that we must navigate
together.
As a university that prides itself on being the home of difference-makers, we believe
that responsibility for the appropriate use of Gen AI is shared across our community.
That’s why we are a signatory to the Scottish Tertiary Education Statement on the Use
of Generative AI, which promotes a values-based approach rooted in humancentredness, trust, ethics, equity, environmental responsibility, collaboration, and
transparency.
This document outlines to everyone in our community their responsibilities, providing
clear guidance to help all of us use Gen AI effectively and ethically.

1. Our Collective Responsibilities .................................................................. 3
2. University Leadership ............................................................................... 3
3. Academic Staff (Teaching)......................................................................... 4
4. Professional Services Staff ....................................................................... 5
5. Students (Undergraduate and Taught Postgraduate)................................... 6
6. Students (Postgraduate Research) ............................................................ 7
7. The Department of Learning and Teaching Enhancement (DLTE) ................ 7
8. Edinburgh Napier University External Stakeholders .................................... 8
9. Edinburgh Napier Students Association (ENSA) ......................................... 9

Edinburgh Napier University’s Position on Generative Artificial Intelligence: Our Shared
Commitment to Ethical and Responsible Use
© 2025 is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

1. Our Collective Responsibilities
1.1. We all are responsible for understanding the ethical implications of Gen AI,
including its impacts on academic integrity, personal and institutional data,
misinformation, bias, copyright, equity, and the environment.
1.2. Staff and students are expected to declare when they directly use AIgenerated content.
1.3. DLTE provides support and training in Gen AI for staff and students, and we
should all maintain a level of critical awareness to make informed decisions
about its use.
1.4. Anyone processing personal data on behalf of the University is required to
comply with the University Data Protection Policy when using any Gen AI
tools.

2. University Leadership
2.1. The University Leadership does not require
anyone – staff nor student – to use Gen AI
due to ongoing concerns regarding security,
reliability, reproduction of bias, inequity in
access, copyright infringements, and
environmental impact.
2.2. The University Leadership does not permit
the use of Gen AI detection tools on student
assessment submissions, as current
technologies have proven to be unreliable,
prone to bias, and we do not have students’
informed consent for their use with their
work.

University Leadership
tl;dr
Policies ensure ethical Gen AI use
and GDPR compliance. The
University prohibits unreliable Gen
AI detection tools. There is no
requirement to use Gen AI, but the
University Leadership will monitor
developments.

2.3. The University Leadership does not permit
the use of Gen AI in marking student submissions or generating feedback,
unless this has been made clear to students in advance and there are other
opportunities for personalised feedback from tutors.
2.4. The University Leadership will uphold academic integrity by ensuring that
academic policies and regulations guide ethical and responsible Gen AI use by
staff and students.

2.5. The University Leadership ensures adherence to UK GDPR legislation,
including that Gen AI tools are not used for automated decision-making on
individuals.
Edinburgh Napier University’s Position on Generative Artificial Intelligence: Our Shared
Commitment to Ethical and Responsible Use
© 2025 is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

2.6. The University Leadership is committed to maintaining transparency, data
privacy, and human oversight in all AI-related processes to protect the rights
and interests of our students, staff, and wider university community.
2.7. The University Leadership recognises that Gen AI can be a valuable and
enabling tool for many, enhancing understanding, productivity and
accessibility, and offering particular benefits for disabled and neurodivergent
individuals.
2.8. The University Leadership will monitor Gen AI developments and continue to
collaborate with students, staff, external partners and the sector to update our
policies and guidance regularly in response to a dynamic environment.

3. Academic Staff (Teaching)
3.1. You have the disciplinary expertise and
pedagogical experience to determine
whether the use of generative AI tools will
support or impair your students’ learning.
You have the academic freedom to decide
what use of Gen AI – if any – is permitted,
on individual assessments and other
learning activities.

Academic Staff
tl;dr
Academic staff can decide Gen
AI’s role in learning but must
clearly communicate its permitted
use to students. Gen AI in
teaching materials or feedback
must be disclosed, and detection
tools are not allowed. Keep up to
date on Gen AI, training is
provided.

3.2. You are responsible for clearly informing
students on your modules and programmes
about what uses of Gen AI are permitted for
learning tasks and assessments. You can
use and adapt the ‘traffic light’ slide from
DLTE’s Gen AI toolkit to communicate to
students what is and is not allowed, as per
the assessment brief. Additionally, clear
guidance on Gen AI use should be included in every assessment brief as per
the University Assessment Policy [forthcoming].
3.3. Use the Assessment Gen AI Declaration sheet with students for each
assessment submission.
3.4. You are not permitted to use external detection tools on student work, as
current technologies have proven to be unreliable, prone to bias, and we do
not have students’ informed consent for their use.

3.5. You should always declare use of Gen AI in the creation of teaching materials
or feedback to students.
3.6. You should stay broadly informed about the ethical issues with Gen AI, its
impact for your discipline and professional contexts, and the evolving
functionality of Gen AI tools. The University will provide CPD opportunities, and
Edinburgh Napier University’s Position on Generative Artificial Intelligence: Our Shared
Commitment to Ethical and Responsible Use
© 2025 is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

you are also encouraged to engage with external networks relating to your field
and professional practice.
3.7. You should keep in contact with relevant Professional Statutory and Regulatory
Bodies (PSRB’s) on developments regarding Gen AI in the professions and
how learning – with and without Gen AI – is being supported in your
programmes.
3.8. Engage in ongoing discussions and critical reflections with your programme
team, subject group and Associate Dean for Learning and Teaching to identify
actions for assessment redesign.
3.9. Employ strategies for developing students’ Gen AI literacy throughout
programmes.
3.10. You should never require students to sign-up for or use Gen AI tools, as they
may have privacy, ethical and environmental concerns. Always provide an
alternative means for engaging with the task (contact dlte@napier.ac.uk for
advice).
3.11. Foster critical discussions with students about the challenges and
opportunities of Gen AI in their studies, and their current and future work. Seek
feedback from students to understand their perspectives and experiences of
using or not using Gen AI.
3.12. Always comply with Data Governance’s Interim Generative Artificial
Intelligence (AI) & Data Protection Guidance.
3.13. In a case where you suspect a student has submitted work which contains
undeclared or inappropriate use of Gen AI tools, you should follow the
university’s academic integrity referral process and/or discuss with your School
Academic Integrity Officer.

4. Professional Services Staff
4.1. You should comply with the Interim
Generative Artificial Intelligence (AI) & Data
Protection Guidance.
4.2. You should stay broadly informed about the
ethical issues with Gen AI, its impact on your
role and professional contexts, and the
evolving functionality of Gen AI tools. The
University will provide CPD opportunities,
and you are also encouraged to engage with
external CPD relating to your professional
practice.

Professional Services
Staff tl;dr
Staff should follow Gen AI
guidelines, explore responsible
Gen AI use, and stay informed.
Extensive Gen AI-generated
content must be disclosed.

Edinburgh Napier University’s Position on Generative Artificial Intelligence: Our Shared
Commitment to Ethical and Responsible Use
© 2025 is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

4.3. Where appropriate, you are encouraged to explore opportunities to leverage
Gen AI responsibly within your role, while ensuring you comply with the data
protection guidance in 4.1.
4.4. You should declare any extensive use of Gen AI in communications or
materials, especially where you have used it to generate new ideas or content.

5. Students (Undergraduate and
Taught Postgraduate)
5.1. You have a personal responsibility to think
critically about the ethical implications of Gen
AI as part of your learning, including its
environmental impact, bias, misinformation,
and data privacy. Engage with MyNapier’s
Generative Artificial intelligence tools pages.
5.2. You are responsible for ensuring your work
reflects your own thinking, skills, and
understanding.
5.3. If you use Gen AI tools in your learning or
assessments, you must follow university
guidance and acknowledge AI-generated
content.

Undergrad and
Postgrad Students
tl;dr
Students must ensure their work is
their own and acknowledge direct
used of Gen AI content. If unsure,
ask your tutor. Think critically
about Gen AI. Misuse is academic
misconduct with serious
consequences.

5.4. Misrepresenting AI-generated work as your
own is academic misconduct and may result in an academic integrity
investigation. The outcome of such an investigation may have significant
implications for your future studies and negatively impact your personal
development and future career prospects.
5.5. You should be familiar with the Academic Integrity Regulations and Student
Community Code.
5.6. If you are unsure about permissible use of Gen AI in your assessments, check
the Assessment Brief and ask your module leader/tutor.
5.7. If you are under pressure trying to complete an assessment and are thinking
about inappropriately using an Gen AI tool to do it for you, you should avoid
this and seek out other means of support, including your module leader/tutor,
your PDT, the Academic Skills team, Wellbeing and Inclusion Team, and
ENSA.

Edinburgh Napier University’s Position on Generative Artificial Intelligence: Our Shared
Commitment to Ethical and Responsible Use
© 2025 is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

6. Students (Postgraduate
Research)
6.1. Postgraduate research is founded on the three
pillars of independence, originality and
significance. Ensure that any use of Gen AI in
your studies does not compromise your ability
to undertake research that achieves these
three pillars.
6.2. Share your research writing with your
supervisors regularly during your studies and
always discuss any intended use of Gen AI
with them first.

Students
(Postgraduate
Research)
tl;dr
Gen AI use in research must be
discussed with supervisors and
properly disclosed. Theses must
be the student's original work, not
Gen AI-generated.

6.3. You have a personal and professional
responsibility as a researcher to think critically
about the ethical implications of Gen AI use in
research, including its environmental impact, bias, misinformation, and data
privacy.

6.4. Misrepresenting AI-generated work as your own is academic misconduct and
may result in an academic integrity investigation. The outcome of such an
investigation may have significant implications for your future studies and
negatively impact your personal development and future career prospects.
6.5. Any use of Gen AI in the process and writing-up of your research should be
clearly acknowledged.
6.6. Your final thesis should be your own work, not AI-generated content.

7. The Department of Learning and Teaching
Enhancement (DLTE)
7.1. DLTE provides guidance and resources to
academic and professional services
colleagues on Gen AI in relation to
learning, teaching and assessment at the
University. DLTE also provides guidance
and support to students on appropriate
use of Gen AI.
7.2. DLTE provides training in Gen AI
awareness, appropriate use and literacy
for all staff.

DLTE tl;dr
DLTE provides Gen AI support,
training and resources for staff and
students. It promotes ethical Gen
AI literacy through research and
student partnership.

Edinburgh Napier University’s Position on Generative Artificial Intelligence: Our Shared
Commitment to Ethical and Responsible Use
© 2025 is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

7.3. DLTE facilitates workshops, sharing practice sessions, online community
spaces, and bespoke training on Gen AI in relation to learning, teaching and
assessment.
7.4. DLTE collaborates with colleagues, departments and schools across the
university to ensure alignment with practices, policies and strategies.
7.5. DLTE leads and supports research and evidence-based practice in education
with Gen AI.
7.6. DLTE works in partnership with students to gather their experiences and
opinions, and to provide Gen AI training and literacy.

8. Edinburgh Napier
University External
Stakeholders
8.1. Prospective students can trust that
Edinburgh Napier University is committed
to teaching Gen AI literacy through a lens
of ethical and environmental responsibility,
preparing our graduates to use AI
critically, thoughtfully and with integrity.
8.2. Professional Statutory and Regulatory
Bodies (PSRB's) who accredit Edinburgh
Napier University programmes can be
assured that our assessments and awards
are robust and valid.

External Stakeholders
tl;dr
The University ensures Gen AI
literacy with ethical responsibility.
Graduates are prepared to
critically engage in an AIintegrated society.

8.3. Employers and our partners can be assured that our graduates are not only
skilled in the appropriate use of Gen AI but also understand its ethical
dimensions, making them responsible and informed professionals.
8.4. We will engage with policymakers, Professional Statutory and Regulatory
Bodies, the media, and the wider academic community to contribute to
informed discussions on Gen AI’s ethical challenges, ensuring that our
approach aligns with best practices at national and international levels.

Edinburgh Napier University’s Position on Generative Artificial Intelligence: Our Shared
Commitment to Ethical and Responsible Use
© 2025 is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

9. Edinburgh Napier Students
Association (ENSA)

ENSA

9.1. ENSA promotes and provides University
guidance around appropriate use of Generative
tl;dr
AI.
9.2. ENSA supports students who may be struggling
with use of Generative AI by signposting to
ENSA supports students on Gen
Academic Skills guidance.
AI use, promotes guidance,
9.3. ENSA regularly gathers the viewpoints of
gathers feedback and helps shape
students on how Generative AI is being used at
University policy.
Napier, and how students view the changing
landscape.
9.4. ENSA provides support to students following accusations of inappropriate use
of Generative AI.
9.5. ENSA works in collaboration with University departments around creation of
policy and guidance on the use of Generative AI.

Edinburgh Napier University’s Position on Generative Artificial Intelligence: Our Shared
Commitment to Ethical and Responsible Use
© 2025 is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
