Student Directory

Menu

My course

Get in touch with your department
Attendance and engagement
Awards and achievements
Changing your course
Contractual documents
DBS check
Fees and funding
Graduation
Immigration and visas
Intermission
Leaving or returning to Essex
Modules
Programme specifications
Registration
Study abroad
Timetables
My information

Exams and coursework

Your guide to exams and coursework
Exam guides and policies
Coursework submission
Extenuating circumstances
Reassessment
Academic appeals
Academic offences
Rules of assessment
Research governance

Study resources

Academic skills
Learning tools
Mentoring
Student handbooks
Student Advisor
Places to study
Postgraduate research resources
Essex Student Journal

Careers support

Careers service
Get a job
Get application support
Get experience
Get career ready
Start your own business
Support for international students
Meet the Careers Team

Student life

New students
Disability and accessibility
Extra learning opportunities
Equality, diversity and inclusion resources
Essex values
Faith Centre
Forums and networks
Student communities
Students' Union
Student voice
Crowdfunding

Our University

FAQs for students - the future of our University
Academic freedom and freedom of speech
Freedom of information
Equality, diversity and inclusion
Sustainability and biodiversity

Services and facilities

Advice and support
Accommodation
Buildings, grounds and maintenance
Childcare
Events, meetings and conferences
Food and drink
IT services
Learn a language
Library services
Media Centre
Post and property services
Professional Services teams
Social spaces
Sport
Theatre and arts
Travel and transport

Fees, funding and money matters

Money matters overview
Fees
University financial support
Undergraduate scholarships and funding
Masters scholarships and funding
Postgraduate research scholarships and funding
Loans
Managing your money
Benefits and council tax
Money events
Terms and conditions from previous years

Health, safety and wellbeing

Emergencies
Report an incident or concern
Fire safety
Your health and safety
Medical support and healthcare
Mental and emotional health
Safeguarding

Quick links

Timetables

Moodle

Find Your Way map

LEAP

FASER

Email login

Students Services Hub

Campus

Accessible travel
Events
Sport
Accommodation
Library services
Clubs and societies room booking form
News
Student blog
Departments and Schools

Online services

My Essex student portal (current students)
My Essex applicant portal
Change your password
Report an absence
Phonebook and email directory
eNROL
Order official documents
Listen Again
Reading lists
Student Request Portal

Support and Contact

Fees, funding and money queries
IT help and support
Report harassment
Get in touch with your department
Report a concern about a student
Find a staff profile
Key dates
Getting ready to start at Essex (new students)
Students' Union

Current students

Academic offences

Artificial intelligence guidance

Artificial intelligence guidance

Artificial Intelligence, or AI, is a term used to describe machine-implemented abilities to reason, plan, solve problems, think abstractly, comprehend complex ideas, learn quickly or learn from experience.

Generative AI

Generative AI is a type of AI that creates new content or data. Recent developments mean that Generative AI is very easy to access and use without specialist training for example through applications such as ChatGPT, Bard, Claude and Bing. For example, ChatGPT could be asked to explain how a combustion engine works and it will return a well-written coherent written answer. Applications like DALL-E can even create images based on a written description provided by the user. For example, you could request a water-painting of a sailing boat on calm waters with snow-capped mountains in the background and it will create a new image fitting that description.

The University's position on AI

Generative AI technology will certainly be something that you encounter in your personal and professional lives long after you have graduated. At Essex, we want you to explore generative AI tools responsibly. But when you use these tools, remember to think about things like keeping your data safe, respecting copyrights, and being honest in your academic work. We hope that by the time you graduate, you will have developed the knowledge and skills to be able to use AI effectively and ethically to support your learning and help you succeed in the future.

Limitations of AI

Text-based responses that generative AI produces are well-written and can appear convincing. However, generative AI learns from historic internet-based material which can be out of date or unreliable. Sometimes this means generative AI presents information that is not correct. Other known limitations of generative AI are that it can create fictitious citations, make up facts, express biased views, give weak responses about nuanced, contextual, or contemporary matters for which there is often little or no accurate web-based information for it to draw upon. These errors are often difficult to spot and therefore never assume that the content created by generative AI is accurate, up to date or true unless you know it to be so or have verified it through another reliable source. You are always responsible for determining the accuracy of what you write.

Using AI with your learning

It is important to realise that AI’s most useful application is to augment rather than replace human intellectual and creative thinking. There are many legitimate ways in which you can use AI to help you study and learn. We encourage you to use AI tools to develop an understanding of its strengths and limitations, and the skills to use AI ethically and effectively.

Here are a few examples of how AI could be used to help with your learning:

- creating an essay plan to help you develop and improve the structure of your assignment

- using AI to help you improve your grammar or your writing style by looking at how it constructs answers to questions

- asking AI to explain a concept, theory, or text that you have had trouble understanding. Providing the explanation is used to help you understand and is not copied into your assignment, you will not be committing any academic offence. however…

- never assume the information generated by AI is accurate or true. Check it.

AI can't be used to write assessments

Writing your own assignments is the only way in which you will develop the skill of communicating effectively in written form. It is also a key pathway for developing your skills more broadly, including the key abilities of developing, formulating, expressing, and testing your own ideas. You will be cheating yourself if you don’t use your time at university to develop those skills by writing your own assignments – whether with or without assistance from digital tools including AI.

What would be cheating?

Providing you do not attempt to pass off AI generated material off as your own work, you will not be cheating and will not have committed any academic offences. Under 1.2c of our current Academic Offences Procedures the following would constitute an academic offence:

“…false authorship or contract cheating, including the soliciting of a third party or the use of artificial intelligence, machine learning or other automated technology, to produce material that is then submitted for assessment and presented as one’s own original work.”

How to avoid an academic offence

- Always cite and reference material included in your assignments that is not your own work.

- Never present AI generated work as your own in an assignment. That would be cheating. Your lecturers and teachers will give you more specific instructions but in general you will be expected to include information about how you have used AI as part of your assignment submissions.

- Never ask AI to generate experimental data which you then submit having purported to have collected it yourself as primary data, either in raw form or after analysis. This is fabrication and counts as serious misconduct.

- When you are preparing an assignment, it is a good idea to keep notes that you make along the way and try to keep different versions saved as separate files as your work develops. Should you be suspected of committing an academic offence you will be able to use such notes and archived files to demonstrate how you have constructed the assignment.

- Be transparent about which tools you use and how you have used them to create your academic work.

- Find help on academic skills, including referencing.

- Read the guidance on academic offences and academic integrity.

Need help?

For further help and advice please contact the Student Services Hub.

Contact the Student Services Hub

CONTACT US

Contact us

- For enquiries contact your Student Services Hub

-

- University of Essex

- Wivenhoe Park

- Colchester CO4 3SQ

Cookie settings

-
Disclaimer

-
Accessibility

-
Privacy and Cookie Policy

CONNECT WITH US

&copy; 2026 University of Essex. All rights reserved

login
