

Using AI tools for study

Learning to use artificial intelligence (AI) tools effectively and appropriately is an essential digital literacy skill for both your studies and future career.

This page is your gateway to all you need to understand and use AI tools for study. Use the quick links on this page or visit the Using AI for Study FLO site to explore the full range of guides and practical advice.

Steps for using AI for study

Making the most of AI

Academic integrity

Learn about AI



Flinders University position statement on the use of AI



Using AI at Flinders - FAQs



Unsure about using AI? Just ask



Need help?

Copilot chat at Flinders

Flinders University students aged 18 and over have access to Microsoft Copilot Chat, which offers the security of enterprise data protection.

Learn how to access and use Copilot Chat

Unsure about using artificial intelligence for an assessment?

Watch this video for advice from Flinders staff and students. Get ideas for questions to ask – and learn why it is important to ask them.

You can also use this AI scale to help when asking your lecturers about AI use.

Need help?

Accessing Copilot chat

Contact Flinders Connect for IT support

Academic integrity and acknowledging use of AI

Learning Lounge (SLSS)

Reference guides (SLSS)

Using AI as an information source or search tool

Contact the library

Sturt Rd, Bedford Park

South Australia 5042

Ph: 1300 354 633 (Select 4)

Email: library@flinders.edu.au

- Staff Portal

- Current students

- Flinders website

Follow Flinders Library

Website feedback and requests

Disclaimer

Accessibility

Privacy

CRICOS Provider: 00114A TEQSA Provider ID: PRV12097

Last Updated: 27 Jul 2026

This website uses cookies

Flinders University uses cookies to ensure website functionality, personalisation and a variety of purposes as set out in its website privacy statement. This statement explains cookies and their use by Flinders.

If you consent to the use of our cookies then please click the button below:

Accept all cookies and continue

If you do not consent to the use of all our cookies then please click the button below. Clicking this button will result in all cookies being rejected except for those that are required for essential functionality on our website.

Reject all non-essential cookies and continue
