
Generative AI for PGR Students: Checklist 
This Checklist of ten steps 
aims to highlight key considerations to 
help 
PGRs
 use 
Gen
AI
 tool
s responsibly and in line with university guidelines, and serve as a useful starting point for discussions with supervisors
. As the
 information here 
co
llates
existing 
advice available from 
several
 university
 webpages
, for any queries please contact the owner of the relevant 
content.
T
his guide was originally created for
 t
he 
university’s
PGR Research Integrity Training Course
.
1. What GenAI tools are you thinking about using? Why do you think they will benefit your work? How will you critically evaluate the results?
A careful consideration of these initial questions 
can help you to assess:
Do you need to use GenAI?
How will the use of 
GenAI
benefit 
your 
studies? 
What GenAI tools do you plan to use to achieve this? 
What are the potential risks?
What are the key points that you need to check 
in the 
guidance from the universit
y
 on responsible use?
Is there anything unclear around responsible use that you need to explore further? 
What do you need to discuss 
with your supervisor? (see step 4 below)
2. What are the university guidelines around the use of GenAI?  
Webpage guidance
The two webpages below are essential reading for PGR students on how to use GenAI and maintain academic / research integrity: 
UofG AI Information for Students
 (from the Student Learning Development Team)
Contains advice on: 
Using AI for study, research and writing – without breaking our academic integrity rules
UofG AI in Research Guidance
 (from the Research Services Directorate) 
Mentions the requirement: “As a student, all your submitted work must be of your own creation, your own critical evaluation process, and your own experience. We expect your work to clearly and transparently acknowledge any sources – including AI – that have added to the work."
Code of Good Practice in Research requirements
The 
Code of Good Practice in Research (section 5)
 covers guidelines on Generative AI: 
5.28. The University has issued 
guidance for researchers around the use of Generative AI
 in their work and research. This guidance seeks to support the responsible, appropriate, and informed use of AI tools and to support academic and research integrity. 
5.29. The overriding principle that applies to all staff and students is that 
any use of generative AI tools must be accompanied by critical analysis and oversight on the part of the user
.
5.30. Where AI tools form part of your research design or methods, the toolkit within your discipline, or are a subject of your research, your use of them as a researcher should be covered by relevant ethical approval and data protection processes.
5.31. Where AI tools are being used to support writing, in order to meet crucial requirements for assessment or academic/research integrity, work must be your own effort (e.g. it must not be the product of generative AI) If you make use of an AI tool at any point in your research or writing process, you must acknowledge the use of that tool as you would any other piece of evidence or material in your submission. 
Guidance is available from UKRIO in support of this position
.
3. Avoiding potential plagiarism when using GenAI tools 
It's important for PGR students to be aware of the risks of plagiarism when using GenAI tools, and this also highlights the importance of transparency and citing use as part of responsible practice. Since GenAI tools don’t usually reveal the source of the information they provide in the output, any output should be considered someone else’s work (and someone else’s copyright). Using an output directly from GenAI 
as your own ideas or work 
would be regarded as plagiarism
 (academic misconduct) by the university. AI detection software keeps evolving and may be implemented to check what proportion of work is likely to have been AI-generated
.
See
also 
the 
university plagiarism 
regulations
The 
avoiding academic misconduct 
- quick tips
 is a useful source of advice
: 
“
Make sure all 
work
 you 
submit
 – essays, lab reports, presentations, exam answers, 
etc
 – is entirely your own work. You must not copy, translate, or lightly edit, someone else’s work, you must not have any other person, service or AI tool prepare your work, and you must not prepare your work with another person (except in specific assignments where it is clearly marked as a group effort).
”
The 
academic misconduct guidelines
are
 available for reference
4. Discuss with your supervisor at the earliest opportunity 
An open discussion with your supervisor
can help 
you
to define
responsible use of 
GenAI
 in your 
studies and
avoid any
 potential
 issues further down the line.
Good practice 
would be
 to document this informal 
agreement
e.g.
 an email stored for 
reference and
 record any updates 
to this 
over time
.
 You could refer to step 1 in this Checklist as a basis for these discussions. 
S
upervisors are encouraged 
by the university 
to 
support discussions with
 their
 PGRs about 
use of 
AI – for more on this
see the 
UofG 
AI in Research webpage
 - quick guidance for supervisors
.
What support would PGRs like from their Supervisors around GenAI use?
In an anonymous poll conducted during a webinar on GenAI (
as part of the Research Integrity series 2024-2025
), PGRs at UofG were asked: "What do you wish your supervisor could help with regarding GenAI in Research?" From the list of responses the key themes were: how to use it ethically / responsibly; how to acknowledge use; what is the difference between responsible use for a research publication compared to a thesis; how to use GenAI for assisting a literature review; how to use for translation of foreign-language texts; FAQs of decisions to be made; how to critically evaluate the results. 
5. What are some examples of acceptable use? 
For a helpful summary please see: 
UofG AI 
Information for Students > 
Using AI for study, research and writing – without breaking our academic integrity rules
 e.g. AI can be used to refine your wording, however “do not enter entire essays or paragraphs; use the method to help improve the language of words, phrases or individual sentences.”
As a general rule, the university guidance recommends that students regard GenAI as a ‘conversation partner’ to get initial inspiration and ideas, to summarise key points, and to refine writing by 
improving grammar or spelling. They can be used for finding related literature (eg 
ResearchRabbit
), summarising published research papers (eg 
Elicit
), and to ask questions for a starting point on a topic (eg 
ChatGPT
).
The UofG Library team have 
guidance on using GenAI for literature searching
. 
Responsible use is where these tools don't impact on the knowledge content or structure of your work – if so, this would no longer count as your own original work. 
6. Be transparent: acknowledge use of GenAI tools in your work 
This 
advice
is
 from the 
university’s AI in Research webpage
: 
“If you make use of AI at any point in your research or writing process, no matter at what stage, you must appropriately and transparently acknowledge the use of that source/platform as you would any other piece of evidence/material in your submission.” 
7. Citing use of AI in your work 
The 
university
 recommends that you treat the AI tool as personal correspondence for the purpose of referencing
 – 
advice
 on 
citing AI sources is 
given on the 
AI in Education webpage
 > how should I reference AI?
 (just scroll down to the last section on the page).
8. Critically evaluate GenAI outputs
The 
AI in Research webpage
highlight
s that
“any use of generative AI tools must be accompanied by critical analysis and oversight on the part of the user
”
- 
since GenAI tools 
are unable to 
understand the meaning of the results
 that
 they 
produce
,
 they can be biased and / or inaccurate
.
9. Avoid uploading confidential or sensitive information to an AI tool (this includes research data and peer review content)
AI tools 
typically 
use inputs from the user for their training data - you should regard any 
content that is
fed
 into an AI tool as something that could be used in a future output 
from
 the 
system, 
and
made 
visible to 
other users.
This means that it would be your 
own 
copyright, 
IP
 or authorship that you could potentially be giving away or compromising
through using these tools
.
For more advice on privacy concerns
 see
: 
AI in Research > risks and limitations
. 
10. What are the guidelines on using Copilot through Office 365?
According to the 
Guidance from IT Services
 “Copilot is the only AI service approved for use with University data” (noting that for use of AI tools for research data - this needs to be approved by the relevant Ethics Committee and meet GDPR regulations*). They advise “you must be logged in with your UofG credentials to use Copilot Chat or this is not an approved use and will not meet the University’s security requirements. Always check for the green shield at the top of your chat, it indicates that enterprise data protection is in place.” 
*From the LISU team: “If you plan to use GenAI for research use, you will need to comply with ethics and data protection requirements.” (
taken from this section in SharePoint by LISU 
).
Further reading and courses
Ethical use of GenAI discussions: 
This is 
a 
great 
recorded talk from Dr 
Mohammad Hosseini
 hosted by the Netherlands Research Integrity Network, NRIN (YouTube)
Dr Andrew Porter from CRUK covers ethical considerations in this 
blog post
 - a useful read for any user of GenAI
Guidance from the sector:
UKRIO Embracing AI with Integrity
UKRIO AI resource
 page
 i
Includes this helpful infographic: 
Using GenAI like a Scientist
)
Training courses:
Training course: 
Generative 
AI in Education
 from the School of Education at UofG
Training course: 
Generative AI for Students: Ethics & Academic Integrity
 from Student Learning Development at UofG

