Quick Guidance for Students
 The term 'AI tools' is currently used to refer to a range of tools and resources (not just ChatGPT), which range from being unsuitable for any academic work to being helpful when used appropriately and with academic integrity.
Using machine learning, AI tools can produce human-like text, images, and information, and can respond to specific queries. Tools that can replicate and create the complex responses and behaviours of humans are referred to as 'generative AI'. There are also many computational aids that are used for similar purposes.
It is important to note that using any form of AI or other computational aids in your university coursework, study, exams, or research without acknowledging that input counts as academic misconduct.
The Essentials
If you remember nothing else from this page, remember these three things.
1. In supervised assessments (exams, in-class tests, invigilated practical assessments, vivas, OSCEs), you cannot use GenAI unless your assessment brief expressly allows it. You can use it to help you prepare/revise: flashcards, quizzes, etc.
2. In unsupervised assessments (essays, reports, coursework, projects, dissertations, portfolios), you can use GenAI, but you must acknowledge it. If your course documentation says nothing about GenAI, this default applies. Your course can set additional limits, and those take precedence – so always read your assessment brief.
3. Whatever the assessment, submitting AI-generated content as if it were your own work is academic misconduct. The issue is not using GenAI where it's permitted; it's misrepresenting what is your own work.
Continue reading below for more detailed information on the University of Glasgow's policies about what is allowable, what is forbidden, and how we advise that you use AI in your studies.
 Introduction to Artificial Intelligence (Al)
The University of Glasgow believes artificial intelligence (AI) tools are potentially transformative as well as disruptive. They increasingly feature in academic and professional workplaces.
You will graduate into an AI-augmented world. The university therefore has a responsibility to prepare you for this world, providing space to experiment with, and understand the potential of, AI in an ethical way.
Consequently, rather than seek to prohibit your use of these tools, we want to support you in learning how to use them effectively, ethically, critically, and transparently. If you do want to use generative AI, the University's approved service is Microsoft Copilot Chat, available through your University Microsoft 365 account. Using the University-provided service helps protect your data and provides a secure environment for AI-assisted learning.
If you do choose to use GenAI to help you in your studies, then it is important to be aware that Copilot is the only tool approved for this by the University. We have security arrangements with Microsoft that will prevent UofG material becoming part of the global training dataset. It is the only tool you should use for uploading lecture materials, assessment briefs, slides, etc, and you must get permission from the staff member(s) who created them before you upload them. Copyright is immediately granted to any of us whenever we write something down, whether we mark the work as copyrighted or not, so your lecturers are automatically the copyright holders of their slides. Unless they give you explicit permission to share their work in a tool to be analysed, summarised, remixed, etc., doing so would be a breach of their legal rights to their material. Books, articles and other copyrighted materials should not be uploaded to any tool.
 Academic Misconduct
 Submitting AI-generated content as your own work without appropriate acknowledgement is academic misconduct. This applies even when AI use is otherwise permitted.
The University of Glasgow’s position on the inappropriate use of AI in research and writing is clear. University policy is that all students are marked and assessed 'in recognition of a student's personal achievement. All work submitted by students for assessment is accepted on the understanding that it is the student's own effort'.
Work that is therefore not your own effort – in other words, work submitted that is the result of the work of AI – does not meet this crucial requirement for our assessments.
The fundamental rule with AI and academic integrity is this:
If you make use of AI at any point in your research or writing process, you must acknowledge the use of that tool as you would any other piece of evidence or material in your submission.
We strongly recommend, however, that you treat AI with caution. AI tools do not 'know' the meaning of what they produce, can only simulate the act of being critical, and are prone to biases, inaccuracies and mistakes.
As a student graduating with a University of Glasgow degree, critical analysis is a key skill that you should develop, along with an understanding of research integrity. It is a core part of what we assess in your final year, and it is a fundamental part of what future employers or research supervisors will expect you to be capable of as a graduate.
If you want to know more about academic misconduct, and the processes involved if you are called to an exploratory meeting, then you can find more information on the Student Conduct pages. The Student Representative Council Advice Centre can also offer advice and information on Gen AI use, and a number of other academic issues.
 The two-scenario approach
 At University of Glasgow, we use a two-scenario approach to help you understand how GenAI can be used in assessment, and to understand what skills we expect you to be able to demonstrate. This table gives an overview:
Scenario 1: Supervised AssessmentScenario 2: Unsupervised Assessment
In-person, invigilated tasks where conditions are controlled
Take-home assignments, coursework, group assignments, and other independent work
Ensures students can demonstrate knowledge and skills without external aids
Allows students to draw on resources, tools, and technologies as part of their learning
Examples: examinations, in-class tests, practical assessments, oral presentations, OSCEs
Examples: essays, reports, portfolios, projects, dissertations
GenAI use is NOT permitted unless expressly indicated
GenAI use is generally permited but MUST be appropriately acknowledged. However, course co-ordinators can still indicate, on an assessment-by-assessment basis, any limitations on the use of AI - so you MUST check your course guidelines, or ask a tutor if you are unclear
 Even where use of GenAI is permitted, the same rule applies regarding misuse: if a student generates content using GenAI and then submits that work as if it were their own, then this is academic misconduct.
 How to know what rules apply to you - the three-step process
Check whether your assessment is supervised or unsupervised: read your course documentation, or ask a tutor
Read your course documentation and assessment guidelines for more information on Gen AI use in your assessment: these will always take precedence over general guidelines
If you’re still uncertain, talk to your course tutor or coordinator
If you want to talk with someone about using Gen AI more generally, then you can attend our classes, or make an appointment with the Effective Learning Adviser for your College
 How to acknowledge and reference Gen AI use
 When you’ve used Gen AI, you should include a statement to make this clear to your marker. This example provides a template you could use, but remember to check your course guidelines in case a specific format is requested
Your acknowledgement should includeExample
Name of tool used
Copilot
Version and publisher
M365 Copilot, Microsoft
How it was used
Brainstorming structure
Your original work
All analysis, argument, and writing
These statements not only help you avoid academic misconduct, but they can also be a useful reflective tool to help you spot areas of your work where you consistently look for extra support. If you notice that you tend to use Gen AI tools to help you with your initial structure, or with finding the right academic tone in your assignments, then you might want to make an appointment with an adviser to work on that skill.
Gen AI referencing practice differs depending on which referencing style you are using. You should visit the Library page on referencing styles and select the appropriate style to see what’s appropriate for your work. If you are unsure, check your course guidelines, and ask your course tutor.
 Gen AI in practice - good uses
 These examples will show how Gen AI can be used positively to support your studies. Remember though, you must always check your own assessment guidelines, and talk to your tutor if you're unsure.
Revision and practice – preparing for a supervised assessment
Simone has an exam coming up soon, and she wants to use Gen AI to help her revise and feel confident.
What she did
Used Gen AI to flashcard test her on key concepts
What she checked in advance
Understood that GenAI can’t be used in the supervised assessment itself, but can be used in preparation
Acknowledged?
Not required for preparation
Testing argument strength – unsupervised assessmenthat Gen AI can do here
Explain, quiz, offer feedback on practice answers
Outcome: No issue here. Using Gen AI to prepare is permitted, using it during the supervised assessment is not.
Checking grammar and clarity - editing an unsupervised assessment
Alexander has a lab report to submit for Biology. He knows that he can sometimes be too wordy and this was flagged as an issue in his last piece of written work. He wants to avoid this in his latest assessment.
What he did
Researched and wrote the lab report independently, then used Gen AI to check clarity and concision before submitting
What he checked
Checked course guidelines, which permitted GenAI use in this context with acknowledgment
Acknowledged?
Yes, he completed a statement noting that Gen AI was used for proofreading only
What Gen AI can do here
Catch errors and suggest clearer phrasing. The content, data and analysis are all the student’s own work. He can also use the errors to look for patterns in his writing, which will help him hone his skills and write more clearly from the outset.
Outcome: No issue here. Light editing use (changes to sentence structure, cutting down on word count, as opposed to extensive rewording) with acknowledgement is permitted in his assessment guidelines.
Testing argument strength – unsupervised assessment
Katarzyna has an essay due. She’s read key articles and books from her reading list, and knows the angle she’s going to take, but wants to think through it in more detail to make sure her stance is robust.
What she did
Asked Gen AI to act like a ‘critical friend’ - questioning her approach and asking her to justify her position
What she checked
Her course documentation didn’t cover this exact use, so she checked with her tutor beforehand to make sure this was acceptable
Acknowledged?
Yes: she clearly stated tool, version, and use
What Gen AI can do here
Stress tests your argument, ensure that you can back up your points, make sure you’re aware of counterarguments and how you would respond. The research, approach, structure and writing are all the student’s own work
Outcome: No issue here. Gen AI has supported the thinking process, but it hasn’t replaced it. Gen AI use has also been acknowledged
Using Gen AI for organisation and planning - unsupervised assessment
Priya has ADHD and can find it difficult to break large tasks into manageable steps. She has a dissertation chapter due and is struggling to get started
What she did
Used Gen AI to help create a structured plan and realistic timeframe, breaking the task into smaller stages
What she checked
Course guidelines permitted Gen AI use for planning and editig with acknowledgement
Acknowledged
Yes - she noted that Gen AI was used for planning and task organisation only
What Gen AI can do here
Help externalise and organise your thinking, create task breakdowns, and suggest realistic timelines
Outcome: No issue here. The research, argument, and writing are entirely Priya's own work. Gen AI supported the organisational element of the work, not the academic content
 Gen AI in practice - problematic uses
 These examples will show you how Gen AI use can sometimes lead to problems, even if you use it with the best of intentions. Remember, if you're uncertain, read your assignment guidelines carefully, and talk to a tutor.
AI used to generate citations – unsupervised assessment
Kim is writing an essay for politics. They attended all the lectures and seminars, and they have a good idea of what they want to argue. They tell Copilot the points they want to make, and they ask it to generate citations to back them up.
What they did
Decided what arguments they wanted to make, then asked Gen AI to supply references to back them up without finding or reading the sources themselves
What they checked
They looked at the course guidelines, but they thought that because they had come up with the arguments, then this approach would be fine
Acknowledged?
No – they felt that they had done most of the work without Gen AI
What happened
The submitted work contained fabricated citations: authors and journals that don’t exist, misattributed articles, and page numbers that were incorrect. This was flagged at marking, and the student was called to a meeting to discuss the work
Why this matters
Gen AI tends to have difficulty retrieving sources: it generates text that looks like a citation. It has no way of verifying whether the source exists. Beyond this inaccuracy problem, engaging with research is part of the whole writing process and should inform your approach. It should not be outsourced to Gen AI, and will damage the development of your understanding and skills in the long run
Outcome: Issue here – misconduct. Always find and read your sources. Use your reading lists and the University Library. Make an appointment to talk to one of the Library Support Team for your College for further support, or with Student Learning Development. Citations and bibliographies should be an accurate reflection of your research
Assessment guidelines prohibited use of Gen AI - Unsupervised Assessment
David is in second year in CoSE. He’s getting ready to submit a coding assignment. The aim of this assignment was to develop skills in debugging code. David used Gen AI to help him carry out the debugging, and he acknowledged this. However, since the whole point of the assignment was to develop his skills in this area, using Gen AI here was problematic, even though its use was acknowledged.
What he did
David used Gen AI to support his work in the same way he did on his other courses
What he checked
David assumed the same rules would apply as for his other courses, and so didn’t check course guidance carefully enough
Acknowledged?
Yes: but this didn’t resolve the bigger issue
What happened
David's marker read his acknowledgement and saw that he had used Gen AI inappropriately. There were also issues within the assignment that pointed to Gen AI use. David was called to a meeting to discuss the issue.
Why this matters
This assignment was specifically designed to build skills in debugging code. Outsourcing this to Gen AI means that David is not developing his skills, and will cause him problems later when other more complex work builds on these foundational skills.
Outcome: Issue here – misconduct. The assessment details prohibited Gen AI use for a specific task, but David didn’t read them. Including a statement on Gen AI use is generally good practice, but it doesn’t override course guidance.
Using Gen AI to improve English: how much is too much? - Unsupervised assessment
Ambreen is getting ready to submit an essay for one of her third-year courses in the College of Arts and Humanities. She’s done all of the reading and planning on her own, and she’s written her first draft. She wants the work to look as good as possible, so she asks Gen AI to improve the English.
What she did
Wrote the essay in full, then asked Gen AI to ‘improve the English’. The tool rewrote whole paragraphs, changed the structure of arguments, added some points to back up arguments, and substantially changed the voice of the essay
What she checked
The course guidelines permitted use of GenAI with acknowledgement for broad proofreading, but not this level of editing
Acknowledged?
No. The student had used Grammarly in the past to help with proofreading without acknowledgement, and she thought this was basically the same
What happened?
The submitted work was flagged for a conduct meeting. The writing style didn’t match previous assessments submitted in the course, and one of the points Gen AI added was an advanced theory that wasn’t covered anywhere on the course.
Why this matters
Using Gen AI to correct grammar and surface-level expression is acceptable and should be acknowledged. Using Gen AI to rewrite sections of your work, even unintentionally, means that the submitted work is no longer substantially your own. When you use these tools, you have a responsibility to carefully check any output, and not just assume that what it produces will be acceptable.
Outcome: Issue here – this type of use can easily become a misconduct issue. If you are using Gen AI for language support, then give it specific, limited instructions (check grammar, suggest more academic words instead of ‘A, B, C’): don’t use it to rewrite work. Ensure that you carefully read the output in case it has made more substantial changes. Always acknowledge Gen AI use, no matter how light.
Using Gen AI to format bibliography - unsupervised assessment
Yusuf has an assessment due tomorrow. He’s had a lot of deadlines close together this semester, and he needs to get this one finished and submitted fast to let him move on to his next piece of work. To save time, he uses Gen AI to make sure his bibliography is formatted correctly
What he did
Yusuf did the research and writing for this piece of work. He used a Gen AI tool to format his bibliography because he was running late and because he was less familiar with this referencing style
What he checked
He looked quickly at the course guidelines. He didn’t see this use mentioned, but because the work is due the next day, he didn’t feel he had time to ask a tutor.
Acknowledged?
Yusuf quickly wrote a Gen AI use statement, but only mentioned proofreading
What happened
Gen AI added articles that do not exist to the bibliography, and it altered the details of some of the real articles – which made them appear to be fabricated. This was noticed by the marker and resulted in a exploratory meeting with Conduct
Why this matters
Gen AI struggles with accurate referencing and is well-known to produce ‘hallucinations’: references which look real, but that don’t actually exist. It’s tempting to use it for this purpose, but it frequently results in problems.
Outcome: Issue here: something that looks as straightforward as formatting help can easily become misconduct. There are safe tools you can use for referencing and bibliographies: the University offers training from IT Services in Endnote. Gen AI can do many things well, but it still struggles with referencing, and using it in this way is likely to cause problems. If you’re struggling to meet deadlines, remember that you have options open to you: Extenuating Circumstances and Delayed Assessment Permits (DAPs) Information
