Quality Transformation Unit
Academic Misconduct Regulations and Procedures

Issued by the Quality Transformation Unit
Approved by Senate: Sep 2025
Technical updates of this document take place on an annual basis to reflect changes
to the University of Greater Manchester’s organisational and management structure
and to incorporate earlier, approved amendments to related policies, procedures and
regulations.

Date: Sep 2025
Version number:
Author: Lead of Quality Transformation Unit
Name: Louise Ashby

1

Scope

These regulations and procedures take effect from January 2015 and apply to all undergraduate and
taught postgraduate programmes. Research degree students and staff are subject to the Code of
Practice and Procedures for Investigating and Resolving Allegations of Misconduct in Research.
All module specifications are held on the Module Database (modules.bolton.ac.uk). You can use your
University ID to log in and you can search on the Module Name or Module Number.

Definitions

The following definitions are used throughout the regulation.
Assessment Board: A formally convened meeting to consider and agree student progression and/or
awards decisions.
Assessment Component: An assessment component is one of the assessments on a module from
which the final mark/outcome for the module is derived. This is commonly referred to as summative
assessment.
External Examiner: An individual appointed by the University to moderate student work and to
advise the University on the standards of its awards and to assure the University about the conduct
of its assessments.
Formative assessment: A type of assessment which is aimed at providing students with useful
feedback on their performance and/or practice an assessment format. Formative assessment is not
used to calculate the overall module mark or determine whether a student has successfully passed a
module.
Hearing: A formally convened meeting to consider alleged cases of academic misconduct.
Marking Tutor: Any member of academic staff or otherwise authorised individual responsible for the
marking of an assessment component.
Invigilator: Any member of staff or otherwise authorised individual involved in the supervision of an
examination or in-class assessment.
Programme of Study: The modules pursued by a student in respect of their programme.
PSRB: A Professional, Statutory or Regulatory body. This includes, but is not limited to, accrediting
bodies, awarding bodies and statutory bodies that deal with legal requirements and immigration.
Senate: Any reference to Senate in these regulations shall be deemed to include a reference to any
committee of Senate to which Senate has delegated the relevant authority.
Summative assessment: A type of assessment which contributes to the formal outcome of a
module, either through the contribution of marks or through a pass/fail requirement.
Unfair Means: This is another term for academic misconduct or academic malpractice.

2

Any reference in these regulations to the Head of Standards and Enhancement, Head of academic
area, or other named officer of the University shall be deemed to include a reference to any person
designated by that officer for the purpose. Any reference to an On-Campus role shall be deemed to
also refer to an equivalent Off-Campus Division role.

1.

Purpose

1.1

Any allegation of cheating or other form of academic misconduct in taught programmes,
including, but not limited to, those outlined in section 2 of this regulation shall be dealt with
in accordance with the procedures set out in this document.

1.2

Any allegation of cheating or other misconduct not included in the definitions set out section
2 below, shall be reported to the Head of Standards and Enhancement (or nominee) who, if
satisfied there is a case for investigation, shall advise whether the allegation is considered to
be a minor or serious offence.

1.3

Where a taught programme is subject to a PSRB’s regulations then that body’s regulations
will be applied if this is a condition of approval to offer the programme. Otherwise the
University’s regulations will be applied.

1.4

Students may also be subject to Fitness to Practise procedures, where relevant, which may
have further consequences for the student. Programmes subject to Fitness to Practise
procedures will be identified in the Fitness to Practise regulations.

1.5

In the case of partner organisations where it would not be practicable for the named
University post-holders themselves either to interview a student suspected of academic
misconduct or to participate in any Hearing at the partner organisation, then designated
alternative post-holders at the partner organisation may be nominated in their place.

1.6

In cases referred to in 1.5 the University post-holder normally responsible for the equivalent
stage of the academic misconduct procedures shall be consulted and provide advice and
guidance. Partner staff nominees and proposals for alternative arrangements shall be
subject to the approval of the Head of Standards and Enhancement (or nominee).

1.7

Use of video calling, video chat software and/or telephone interviews, may be used in the
place of face-to-face panels, in which case the identity of the student may need to be
verified at the start of the meeting.

2.

Types of Academic Misconduct

2.1

Use of academic misconduct, encompassing plagiarism or other forms of academic
dishonesty or misconduct, may be defined as any attempt by a student to gain an unfair
advantage in any assessment.

2.2

Academic Misconduct may be demonstrated by using or attempting to use, whether
successfully or not, any one or more of the following:

i.

Plagiarism may be defined as the representation of another person’s work, without
acknowledgement of the source, as the student’s own for the purposes of satisfying
3

assessment requirements. This includes information taken from the internet as well as
published works. Examples of plagiarism are:
-

copying the work of another person (including a fellow student) without acknowledging the
source through the appropriate form of citation;

-

the summarising of another person’s work by simply changing a few words or altering the
order of presentation, without acknowledgement;

-

the use of ideas or intellectual data of another person without acknowledgement of the
source, or the submission or presentation of work as if it were the student’s own, which are
substantially the ideas or intellectual data of another person;

-

the submission of coursework making significant use of unattributed digital images such as
graphs, tables, photographs, etc. taken from books/articles, the internet or from the work of
another person.
ii.

Collusion is where two or more students collaborate to produce a piece of work in order to
both/all gain advantage. The work is then submitted as individual work. Collusion does not
apply to assessment components which specify group submissions.

iii.

Fabrication of data refers to the falsification of data (either qualitative or quantitative),
through invention or amendment, which is then presented by the student as if it had been
legitimately gathered in line with the norms of the discipline concerned.

iv.

Duplication – refers to the inclusion in work of any material which is identical or similar to
material which has already been submitted by the student for any other assessment within
the University or elsewhere e.g. submitting the same piece of coursework for two different
modules.

v.

Commissioning – also known as “contract cheating” involves requesting another person or
using AI to complete an assessment, or contribute to an assessment, such that the output of
that commissioning in whole or part is then submitted as the student's own work. This
includes the purchasing or securing for free a pre-written assessment from an essay writing
website (“essay mill”) or another source.

vi.

Theft of work – submitting another’s work as the suspected student’s own, either in whole
or in part, without that student’s permission.

vii.

Bribery and blackmail - paying or offering inducements or coercing another person to obtain
higher marks or another form of advantage.

viii.

False declarations – Misreporting facts and/or falsification of documents to gain an
advantage. This may relate to (but is not limited to) obtaining an extension, claims for
mitigating circumstances and/or appeals.

2.3

In addition to the above, the following relates specifically to conduct during examinations or
in-class assessments and will also be considered to be academic misconduct:

i.

having at the examination desk any unauthorised notes or other unauthorised material
(whether or not concealed in any manner).

4

ii.

the use of an unauthorised electronic device;

iii.

the use of unauthorised programmes on allowed electronic devices, including algorithms on
calculators that have been programmed prior to the assessment;

iv.

communicating or trying to communicate in any way (oral, written, electronic, non-verbal)
with another person during an examination or test except where the examination rubric
permits this e.g. group assessments;

v.

copying or attempting to copy from another student sitting the same examination or
test;

vi.

being party to impersonation where another person sits an examination or test in the place
of the actual student or a student is knowingly impersonated by another;

vii.

leaving the examination or test venue to refer to concealed notes or other unauthorised
material;

viii.

taking rough notes, stationery, scripts or examination or test papers, which indicate that
they are not to be removed, away from the examination or test venue;

ix.

provision or assistance in the provision of false evidence or knowledge or understanding in
examination or tests;

x.

disruptive behaviour.

2.4

Academic misconduct within an online learning environment will be dealt with in the same
way as for more traditional learning methods.

2.5

Supporting an individual to commit any of the offences listed in 2.2 and 2.3 shall also be
considered to be academic misconduct. Posting assessment material on a
commissioning/essay writing website will also be interpreted as attempting to use unfair
means in assessment and will be dealt with accordingly. Organising for someone else take an
assessment in your place will also be considered as commissioning.

2.6

The list of offences in section 2 of this regulation is not exhaustive and should not be
interpreted as such by students as outlined in 1.2 above.

5

3.
Procedure for dealing with suspected Academic
Misconduct
3.1

Identification of Academic Misconduct

3.1.1 Marking tutors, invigilators, and exceptionally External Examiners and those considering

appeals or mitigating evidence, are responsible for the identification of suspected cases of
academic misconduct. The suspected academic misconduct should be reported to the
relevant Module Leader (or Programme Leader if the academic misconduct does not relate
to a specific assessment). The Module Leader (or Programme Leader) and the person
responsible for reporting the academic misconduct should assess the severity of the alleged
academic misconduct and shall initiate the relevant procedure below.

3.1.2 The table provided in Annex C should be used to determine the severity of the alleged

academic misconduct. There are two levels of offence; Minor and Serious. The relevant
procedure outlined below should be followed for the relevant type of offence.

3.1.3 Where a post-holder who is involved in the consideration of a case of academic misconduct

has a personal relationship with a student suspected of academic misconduct, any potential
conflict of interest should be declared. This should be reported to the post-holder’s line
manager, who shall determine if the relationship presents a genuine conflict of interest. If
necessary, the line manager will appoint an alternative member of staff to consider the
alleged academic misconduct.

3.2

Informal Warnings

3.2.1 Where it is concluded that there was no intent to deceive and/or that the academic

misconduct occurred on a formative assessment, an informal warning may be issued to the
student.

3.2.2 If an informal warning is issued it should be reported to the relevant Programme Leader who
should record the fact that an informal warning has been issued. The Module Leader should
arrange for the student to receive appropriate training and/or advice on how to avoid
committing academic misconduct. Informal warnings will not be recorded on the Academic
Misconduct register.

3.2.3 An informal warning should only be issued for a first time minor offences or a first time

serious offence which was unintentional and caused no advantage. An informal warning can
only be issued once.

3.3

Procedure for Dealing with Minor Offences

3.3.1 In cases where there is a suspected Minor Offence of academic misconduct, a Programme
Hearing will be held, normally within one month of identification of the alleged offence.

3.3.2 The Programme Hearing will normally require the student to attend an interview with their
Programme Leader (Panel Chair)* and another academic who has had no previous
involvement in the case. The Panel will assess the allegations and review documentary
evidence.
6

The marking tutor for the assessment in question, or the person responsible for reporting the
academic misconduct, if different, may also be invited to attend the start of the hearing to
present the case in question.
* Where the Programme Leader has had has had previous involvement in the case, another
Programme Leader should be appointed as the Chair.
3.3.3

Where the academic misconduct involves more than one student, the students should be
invited to attend separate hearings and panel decisions should not be made until all parties
have been interviewed.

3.3.4

In advance of the meeting, the marking tutor for the assessment in question, or the person
responsible for reporting the academic misconduct if different, should in conjunction with
the Module Leader, complete an Academic Misconduct Report, outlining the facts and
nature of the case, the evidence for the alleged offence and whether any prior offence(s)
have been recorded.

3.3.5

A copy of the report, a copy of these regulations, a letter or email explaining the possible
consequences of the academic misconduct being proven and any other papers considered
relevant should be emailed to the student along with the invitation to attend the meeting
and/or provide a documentary response, as appropriate. These should normally be sent at
least five working days before the Programme Hearing.

3.3.6 All papers should also be emailed to the Programme Leaders(s) responsible for the
programme.

3.3.7

The student has the right to be supported at the meeting by one friend. The friend may be a
fellow student or a member of staff from the Students’ Union, or, if the student has a
disability, a support worker, but may not otherwise be external to the University. It should
be noted that the friend is there to support the student, not to answer questions or put
forward a case in their stead.

3.3.8

If the student does not attend the interview, or chooses not to attend but to submit
documentary evidence, the meeting will go ahead in the student’s absence and the hearing
will consider the case based on any documentary evidence submitted by the tutor and the
student in response to the charge of academic misconduct.

3.3.9

The outcome of the meeting, with or without the attendance of the student, will be that the
minor case of the use of unfair means is either proven (including where admitted by the
student) or not proven.

3.3.10In cases where the academic misconduct is proven a penalty will be applied from those
available for Minor Offences as detailed in Annex C. In deciding the severity of the penalty
for the minor offence, the Panel should normally take the following mitigating factors in
taken into account:
- the number and seriousness of previous offences (if any)
- whether the student has admitted the offence at the earliest opportunity
- whether the student has expressed remorse
- whether the student has compelling personal circumstances which affected their judgment
7

3.3.11 The applied penalty will be reported to the relevant Assessment Board and recorded on the
Academic Misconduct Register.
3.3.12In cases where academic misconduct is not proven, no penalty shall be applied and the
student’s details shall not be entered onto the Academic Misconduct Register.
3.3.13The student will normally be informed in writing, normally via the students’ University email
and personal email (if on the student record) addresses, of the outcome of the Programme
Hearing within five working days of the meeting.

3.4

Procedure for dealing with Serious Offences

3.4.1 In cases where there is a suspected Serious Offence of academic misconduct, a School
Hearing will be held.
3.4.2 The School Hearing will normally require the student to attend an interview with a Panel
Chair, the student’s Programme Leader*, and another academic (chosen by the Chair), who has had
no previous involvement in the case. The Chair will be the Head of the academic area or nominee of
sufficient seniority. The Panel will assess the allegations** and review documentary evidence.
The marking tutor for the assessment in question (or the relevant invigilator for academic
misconduct in an examination) may also be invited to attend the start of the hearing to present the
case in question.
* Where the Programme Leader has had has had previous involvement in the case, another
academic should be appointed as a Panel member
**This assessment may include asking the student relevant questions to test the authenticity of their
work.

3.4.3 Where the academic misconduct involves more than one student, the students should be
invited to attend separate hearings and panel decisions should not be made until all parties have
been interviewed.
3.4.4 In advance of the meeting, the marking tutor for the assessment in question, or the person
responsible for reporting the academic misconduct if different, should in conjunction with the
Module Leader (or Programme Leader), complete an Academic Misconduct Report, outlining the
facts and nature of the case, the evidence for the alleged offence and whether any prior offence(s)
have been recorded.
3.4.5 A copy of the report, a copy of these regulations, a letter or email explaining the possible
consequences of the academic misconduct being proven and any other papers considered relevant
shall be emailed to the student along with the invitation to attend the meeting and/or provide a
documentary response, as appropriate. These should normally be sent at least five working days
before the School Hearing.
3.4.6 All papers should also be emailed to the Programme Leaders(s) responsible for the
programme and the Chair of the Academic Misconduct Panel.

8

3.4.7 The student has the right to be supported at the meeting by one friend. The friend may be a
fellow student or a member of staff from the Students’ Union, or, if the student has a
disability, a support worker, but may not otherwise be external to the University. It should
be noted that the friend is there to support the student, not to answer questions or put
forward a case in their stead.

3.4.8

If the student does not attend the interview, or chooses not to attend but to submit
documentary evidence, the meeting will go ahead in the student’s absence and the hearing
will consider the case based on any documentary evidence submitted by the tutor and the
student in response to the charge of academic misconduct.

3.4.9

The outcome of the meeting, with or without the attendance of the student, will be that the
case of the use of academic misconduct is either proven (including where admitted by the
student) or not proven.

3.4.10 The School Hearing may decide to downgrade the severity of the offence to Minor, in which
case a penalty from those available for Minor offences will be applied.
3.4.11 In cases where the academic misconduct is proven, a penalty will be applied as detailed in
Annex C. In deciding the severity of the penalty for the serious offence, the Panel will
normally take the following mitigating factors into account:
the number and seriousness of previous offences (if any)
whether the student has admitted the offence at the earliest opportunity
whether the student has expressed remorse
whether the student has compelling personal circumstances which affected their judgment
3.4.12 The applied penalty will be reported to the relevant Assessment Board and recorded on the
Academic Misconduct Register.
3.4.13 In cases where academic misconduct is not proven, no penalty shall be applied and the
student’s details shall not be entered onto the Academic Misconduct Register.
3.4.14 The student will normally be informed in writing, normally via the students’ University email
and personal email (if on the student record) addresses, of the outcome of the Programme
Hearing within five working days of the meeting.

4.

Retrospective investigation and identification of
academic misconduct

4.1

If new evidence becomes available in relation to a previous academic misconduct case, the
case can be reconsidered and the process described in section 3 repeated.

4.2

If there is good reason to suspect academic misconduct has taken place in relation to an
assessment which has been considered at an Assessment Board, this may be investigated
retrospectively and the process described in section 3 undertaken.

4.3

In accordance with the Regulations and Procedures for the Conferment of University
Awards, the outcome of investigations into academic misconduct by students may
9

exceptionally lead to an academic award being rescinded where approval or conferment has
already occurred.

5.

Appealing against an Academic Misconduct Decision

5.1

If a student has good reason to believe that the outcome of the relevant Hearing is unfair,
they may submit an academic misconduct appeal together with relevant evidence to the
Head of Standards and Enhancement (or nominee) within fourteen calendar days of the
outcome of the relevant Hearing being sent to the student.

5.2

The Head of Standards and Enhancement (or nominee) shall acknowledge receipt of the
appeal within five working days.

5.3

An appeal may be submitted on the following grounds:
i.
ii.

iii.

The penalty is inconsistent with the type and degree of academic misconduct found;
Further information is now available that would have meant that the Hearing would
have made a different decision had that information been available at the time; [Note: if
students wish to appeal on such grounds, they must give adequate reasons with
supporting documentation why this information was not made available prior to the
decision being made.]
that there was a material administrative error or procedural irregularity in the conduct
of the Hearing of such a nature as to cause significant doubt whether the decision might
have been different if the error or irregularity had not occurred.

5.4

The Head of Standards and Enhancement (or nominee) will assess whether the appeal meets
the grounds outlined in 4.3. If the appeal clearly has no grounds then the Head of Standards
and Enhancement (or nominee) will write to the student to reject their appeal.

5.5

If the appeal does have grounds, the Head of Standards and Enhancement (or nominee) will
organise a meeting of an Academic Misconduct Appeal Panel. The Academic Misconduct
Appeal Panel will consist of two members of academic staff from outside the School or
partner institution.

5.6

The Academic Misconduct Appeal Panel members shall normally not have been involved in
the case prior to the Appeal Panel. However, they may seek clarification from the previous
Academic Misconduct Panel as part of their investigations if necessary.

5.7

The Academic Misconduct Appeal Panel will be serviced by the Head of Standards and
Enhancement (or nominee). Meetings of the Academic Misconduct Appeal Panel will
normally take place within thirty calendar days of the appeal being acknowledged. The
quorum for the meeting shall be the two academic members of staff. Non-attendance by the
student member shall not be deemed a reason for the meeting not to proceed.

5.8

The student will be notified in writing by email of the date of the meeting at least five
working days before it is due to be held and will be invited to attend or to submit a written
statement. The student may be supported by a friend. The friend may be a fellow student or
a member of staff from the Students’ Union, or, if the student has a disability, a support
worker, but may not otherwise be external to the University. It should be noted that the
friend is there to support the student, not to answer questions or put forward a
10

case in their stead. If the student is unavailable to attend they may provide an additional
written statement. Failure to attend or provide a statement will not be a reason for the
meeting not to proceed and a decision may be made in the student’s absence.
5.9

The Academic Misconduct Appeal Panel will consider evidence from the School and the
student. Any new documentary evidence should be shared with the student and the
relevant staff in the School at least five working days’ in advance of the meeting. The
Academic Misconduct Appeal Panel may meet with representatives from the School who
have knowledge of the case.

5.10

The Academic Misconduct Appeal Panel may decide that the appeal is upheld or rejected. If
the appeal is upheld, the Academic Misconduct Appeal Panel may with justification do the
following:
• Dismiss the academic misconduct case and remove this instance of academic
misconduct from the Academic Misconduct register
• Downgrade the severity of the offence and/or penalty
• Upgrade the severity of the offence and/or penalty

5.11

The Head of Standards and Enhancement (or nominee) will normally write to the student
informing them of the outcome of the Academic Misconduct Appeal Panel within five
working days of the meeting. Head of Standards and Enhancement (or nominee) will also
inform the student about the possibility of taking their appeal to the Office of the
Independent Adjudicator (OIA) in the event that they remain unhappy with outcome of their
appeal.

6.

Equality Impact Assessment

6.1

The University of Bolton is committed to the promotion of equality, diversity, and a
supportive environment for all member of our community. Our commitment to equality and
diversity means that this procedure has been screened in relation to the use of plain English,
the promotion of the positive duty in relation to race, gender and disability and avoidance of
discrimination to other equality groups related to ages, sexual orientation, religion or belief
or gender reassignment.

7

Other Related Policies, Procedures, Codes and
Guidelines

7.1

Other relevant policies include:
• Examination Procedures
• Regulations and Procedures for the Conferment of University Awards

8

Monitoring and Review

8.2

These regulations will be reviewed every three years.

8.1

These regulations will be monitored by the Standards and

11

Enhancement Office.

9

Dissemination of and Access to the Policy

9.1

This Policy will be available on the University’s website (Student Policy Zone).

12

ACADEMIC MISCONDUCT REGULATIONS AND PROCEDURES
Policy ref: SEO/MISCON1
Version number
01.04
Version date
December 2014
Technical updates July 2017
Reviewed and updated August 2020
Reviewed and updated May 2022
Technical update to Commissioning
Jan 2023
Technical update to Informal
Warning June 2023
Name of Reviewer
Dr Lisa Cove
Policy Owner (Group/Centre/Unit)
SEO
Person responsible for
Heads of School
implementation (postholder)
Head of Standards and
Enhancement (Taught Provision)
Exec Dean, Research and Graduate
School
Approving committee/board
Senate
Date approved
December 2014
Effective from
January 2015
Dissemination method e.g. website
Website
Review frequency
3 years
Reviewing committee
Education Committee
Consultation history
Drafts of the regulation have been
(individuals/group consulted and
considered by:
Education Committee
dates)
Heads of School/Deans
Academic Co-ordinators for
Standards, Enhancement and the
Learner Experience
Document history (e.g. rationale for The document required an update
and dates of previous amendments) as a result of feedback and external
requirements 2022

13

ANNEX A: Guidance on Academic Misconduct in creative
subjects
The following is particularly relevant to practice in creative subjects
including art and design and creative writing and related subjects such as
film and video making, making installations, photography, play and script
writing and other forms of practical media and performance generation and
presentation. Elements of this guidance may also apply to computer code.
•

Programme Handbooks and Module Guides will normally outline
aspects of originality, independence and creativity expected of
students in achieving aims and outcomes and meeting assessment
criteria in Creative Subjects.

•

It is recognised that in generating new work in Creative Subjects use
is sometimes made of previously published, exhibited or performed
material such as words, images, objects, code, sounds and recordings
from specific sources. Such material sometimes may be quoted or
reproduced in whole or in part as part of a new work of art. It is not
expected that identification through bibliographical data, or other
acknowledgement of the source material will be incorporated or
exhibited overtly in the new creative work itself in the way that
footnotes appear in essays or scientific papers.

•

However, it is required that the use of appropriation, allusion and
quotation as outlined above will be acknowledged fully and clearly in
students’ personal commentaries or self-evaluations on their work
where such written or verbal self-evaluation is a part of the
assessment requirements. Students must be prepared to list and
explain such source material to tutors and assessors as required.

•

Creative work may be marked and assessed, in part, in response to
the originality, inventiveness and creativity of appropriation, allusion
and quotation. However, a student may be penalised for refusal to
acknowledge and discuss such usage if and when it has been
identified. Absence of the acknowledgement of such material in the
appropriate format may be deemed to be use of unfair means and may
result in the unfair means procedures being implemented.

14

ANNEX B: Process flow chart
Suspected Academic Misconduct

Severity of offence is
assessed

If no apparent intent to deceive
and likelihood of poor study
skills, an informal warning may
be issued (No previous offence)

Suspected Minor Offence:
Programme Hearing

Suspected Serious offence:
School Hearing

CASE PROVEN
Penalty applied

Student accepts
outcome:
End of process

CASE NOT PROVEN

Case Dismissed

Student disputes outcome:
Student submits AM appeal

Appeal assessed for
grounds by SEO

Appeal not accepted for

Appeal accepted for
investigation

investigation

Programme/School
Hearing decision
upheld

Academic Misconduct
Appeal Panel meets
15

Hearing decision
modified

ANNEX C: Range of Penalties
A Programme Hearing may apply one of the following penalties for a Minor offence:
Minor Penalties:
Case logged on Academic Misconduct Register, completion of relevant LEAP badge (where
appropriate) and
M1 No penalty*
M2 Fail attempt for the assessment component in question. Further attempt (if eligible) does
not have capped mark i.e. Refer but with uncapped mark on next attempt. The refer
assessment brief may differ from the original.
M3 Mark assessment component but cap at pass mark*
M4 Fail attempt for the assessment component in question. Further attempt (if eligible) has a
capped mark i.e. Refer. The refer assessment brief may differ from the original.
* If the offence relates to plagiarism then only original authentic work will be taken into
account when marking.

A School Hearing may apply one of the following penalties for a Serious offence:
Serious Penalties:
Case logged on Academic Misconduct Register, completion of relevant LEAP badge (where
appropriate) and
S1 Fail attempt for the assessment component in question – allow further attempt in the
assessment component (if eligible) i.e. Refer. The refer assessment brief may differ from the
original.
Overall module mark will be capped at the pass mark.
S2 Fail module with no further attempts. Student can continue for interim award or if module
is optional.
S3 Fail module (if applicable) and programme with immediate effect - with or without an
interim award.
S4 Recommend to Senate expulsion of student from the University - with or without an
interim award.

16

Alternatively, a School Hearing may decide to downgrade the severity of the suspected
academic misconduct to Minor and apply one of the penalties.

17

ANNEX D: Guidance on determining whether an offence is suspected minor or serious
Plagiarism: Reproduction of work from another source (e.g. student, academic source, internet), without appropriate acknowledgement.
Minor
Serious
Small amount of work reproduced without appropriate
Significant amount of work reproduced without appropriate
acknowledgement.
acknowledgement.
Unlikely intention to deceive.
Likely/proven intention to deceive.
No previous formal offence.
Previous formal offence.
First semester/stage of the programme.
Later stages of the programme.
Levels HE3 and HE4
Level HE5 and above.
For a particular penalty band to apply, it might normally be expected that at least three of the conditions listed in that band would be met by the
case under consideration.
Other Forms of Academic Misconduct
Minor
Collusion
Collaborative work is apparent in a few areas, but possibly due to lack
of student’s/students’ awareness.
Fabrication of Primary Data
Substantial part of the data is original to the student.
Duplication
A small amount of work already submitted as part of a previous
assessment is being passed off as new work for another assessment.
Commissioning

Serious
Collaborative work reflects significant similarities, and is probably due
to deliberate attempt to share.
A significant amount of data is found to be fabricated.
A significant amount of work already submitted as part of a previous
assessment is passed off as new work for another assessment.

18

A minor amount of work produced via the use of AI, the content of
which upon questioning the student was not able to demonstrate a
robust understanding.

Work commissioned from another person student’s own – includes
the purchasing of work from an essay-writing service.
A major or serious amount of work produced via the use of AI, the
content of which upon questioning the student was not able to
demonstrate a robust understanding.
Serious

Minor
Theft of work
N/A

Someone else’s work is taken without permission and passed off as
the student’s own

Bribery and Blackmail
N/A

Academic advantage is sought though inducement or threats to
others.

False Declarations
N/A

False information is knowingly presented to the University in order to
seek to gain and academic advantage, for example in relation to
Mitigating Circumstances and Appeals.

Examinations and In-Class Assessments
Communicating with someone other than the invigilator during an
examination or in-class assessment on unrelated matters.
Unauthorised material is not relevant or intentionally used.

Communication during examination or in-class assessment in order to
seek academic advantage.
Use of unauthorised notes or other material (including in electronic
format) in order to seek academic advantage.
Attempting to copy from another student in the examination or inclass assessment.
Misuse of examination or in-class assessment briefs, for example
gaining prior knowledge of contents of unseen paper.
Taking material away from examination or test when instructed not
to.

19

Impersonation: Allowing another person to take the examination or
in-class assessment on the student’s behalf.

20
