In this section

-

Current students

Current students

- Imperial Home

- Current students
- My studies
- Generative AI and Study Guidance Hub

Generative AI and Study Guidance Hub

My studies

Are you a staff member? Visit the Generative AI and Education Guidance HubHave you checked out ICT's helpful guidance for the use of GenAI tools?

Welcome to the Generative AI and Study Guidance Hub, a resource for Imperial's student community about the use of generative artificial intelligence (genAI) at the university.

What is Generative AI?

GenAI creates new content from user prompts based on patterns from existing collections of data.

Several natural language processing models have come to prominence, such as Microsoft Copilot. These models demonstrate a huge step forward in accessible forms of genAI which will develop substantially and quickly in the years to come. In fact, they will likely grow to become a tool we use frequently in our everyday lives.

For students, we anticipate that these genAI models present you with opportunities to explore new ways of studying and learning. For Imperial, there will be opportunities to further improve the quality of the teaching and assessment we offer on your degree programme.

You can also check out dAIsy – Imperial's new AI platform, designed to give you safe, easy access to multiple generative AI models (such as GPT, Claude, Deepseek, and others) through a single interface. It's built to support teaching, learning, and research while ensuring data protection and institutional compliance.

How can I find out more and get trained up?

Have you completed Imperial's Introduction to Generative AI course yet? It is a short, Imperial-produced training experience for all students, and may answer many of the questions you might have about how genAI interacts with your studies.

It is available for:

- Faculty of Medicine students

- Faculty of Natural Sciences

- Faculty of Engineering

- Imperial Business School

- All students who may be unaffiliated with any specific faculty

You might also wish to browse the Imperial Generative AI checklist, to ensure you have familiarised yourself with all the ways genAI can impact your studies.

Imperial's approach to Generative AI

Imperial’s Generative AI principles established the core values used by the university when interacting with genAI tools. They prompt thinking and aid approaches to using this technology in thoughtful and informed ways.

Further information, guidance, and support

Guidance for students

Library Services have collated FAQs, referencing support, and additional resources. These are intended to be considered alongside Imperial's introductory course, genAI principles, and departmental guidance.

Find out more

Introduction to Generative AI – Revised for 2026

An online tutorial has been developed to help you answer any initial questions you may have on the use of generative artificial intelligence (Gen AI) in your studies. This is an updated version of the tutorial from 2025.

Find out more by following the faculty-specific links above

Guidance from departments

Departments may take differing views on how genAI is best applied in teaching and assessment environments. It is recommended that you speak with staff to establish how genAI might interact with your programme.
