GENERATIVE AI IN EDUCATION FRAMEWORK
Introduction
Generative Artificial Intelligence (GAI) refers to AI systems capable of generating new
content in response to input data. Generative AI is a sub-set of AI; where AI focuses on
problem-solving, data analysis and predictions, Generative AI uses algorithms to generate
content based on vast datasets, generating text, images, music and code from prompts.
AI Tools are transforming not just education but the workplace and will form a key
component of both going forward; our graduates will be entering a world where Generative
AI is the norm. AI is already embedded into everyday tools and services such as
spreadsheets, email, and web search which can make it difficult to distinguish when Gen AI
is used part of academic work.
However, whilst it is important to recognise that AI can pose risks in areas such as academic
misconduct, it also has the potential to provide significant benefits. As an institution our
approach to AI is to be risk-aware not risk averse, and to educate ourselves about the
opportunities and risks that Gen AI presents to discover how we can deliver future-facing
real-world learning experiences, enhance student employability skills and support
inclusivity, widening access and participation.
Whilst we need to explore the opportunities AI brings, we also need to ensure that staff and
students are supported to use it responsibly and safely. This framework sets the expectation
that we embed appropriate use of generative AI into our teaching, learning and assessment
practices, to enable pedagogic innovation and to support inclusive education. In doing so,
we should always prioritise human-centred creativity to support ethical use and maintain
academic integrity. This means moving beyond using AI to provide access to information
and summarising responses and towards developing inquiry-based learning, reflective
practice and critical thinking skills.
1.

Purpose

1.1 This framework is intended to ensure that AI in education is used responsibly, ethically,
and equitably within Keele. It aims to support the integration of Generative AI in education
and development and embedding of foundational AI literacies across staﬀ and students,
ensuring that both staff and students are AI-literate and able to use AI in an ethically
responsible way.

Page 1 of 6

Based on the Generative AI principles, the framework outlines approaches to the use of
Generative AI in Education and aims to ensure a more consistent approach of AI
implementation in teaching, learning and assessment. By promoting AI literacy, upholding
academic integrity, we aim to foster a learning environment that leverages the full potential
of AI while maintaining fairness and academic standards.
1.2 The framework should be used in conjunction with other relevant guidance including the
Assessment and Feedback Code of Practice, the Keele Learning Principles and the Inclusive
Education Framework. Use of Generative AI in teaching, learning and assessment must
comply with associated University Codes of Practice, Guidance, Policies and Procedures, a
list of which are provided at the end of this document.
1.3 This framework will evolve as the use of AI in education develops. Keele is committed to
regular review and updates to keep pace with technological advancements and ensure best
practices are followed.

2.

Scope

This framework is based on six high-level principles that guide Keele’s approach to
Generative AI. These principles have been informed by the five principles agreed by the
Russell Group in 2023 to enable universities ensure students and staff are ‘AI literate’.
The six principles are:
•
•
•
•
•
•

3.

Staﬀ and Students will be supported to become more AI Literate
Students will be supported to use Gen AI tools ethically and appropriately in their
learning
Staff will be supported to adapt their teaching learning and assessment methods to
incorporate ethical use of Gen AI
Staff and students will have fair access to Gen AI tools and resources needed for
teaching and learning
Academic integrity will be upheld in all assessments and associated policies will be
reviewed regularly as generative AI tools develop
Best practice will be shared across and beyond the institution as technology and the
application of technology in education develops.

Framework

3.1 Staff and Students will be supported to become more AI Literate
3.1.1 Generative AI literacy is essential for students and staff to fully engage with and
understand the benefits and challenges of generative AI tools. Being AI-literate means
having the requisite knowledge, skills and capabilities to explore and critically evaluate AIPage 2 of 6

generated outputs. Staff are expected to have the necessary foundational level knowledge
and skills to use generative AI tools effectively and responsibly as appropriate for their
discipline, including understanding what AI technology is and how AI models are trained. The AI
Competency Framework sets out expectations on foundational skills and knowledge for staﬀ.
3.1.2 It is important to understand the diﬀerence between AI and Generative AI. Prompting
skills are very important in Generative AI (GenAI); that is the ability to craft eﬀective inputs
(prompts) that guide GenAI models to produce desired outputs and ultimately determine
the quality and relevance of the AI's output. As a minimum, the expectation of all staﬀ
responsible for delivery of teaching and learning is to ensure they are proﬁcient in critical
prompting skills and to test the pedagogical implications of prompts prior to any use in
teaching delivery or assessment design. Provision should be made to support students in
crafting eﬀective prompts and reﬁning AI content to improve their ﬁnal output. The
Assessment and Feedback Code of Practice sets out expectations for use of AI in
Assessment.
3.1.3 Use of AI in education should always be underpinned by a human-centred approach
highlighting the importance of human agency and focused on strengthening human
capabilities, for example developing human employability skills (creativity, decision-making,
empathy, problem-solving, communication and collaboration) when interacting with
Generative AI and through exploration of real-world AI applications. The AI enhanced ABC
Learning Design framework is intended to support staff when designing AI enhanced
learning activities.
3.2 Students will be supported to use AI tools ethically and appropriate in their learning
3.2.1 Staff have a responsibility to ensure that students are supported to use generative AI
tools ethically and responsibly, with an understanding of academic integrity as outlined in
the Academic Misconduct Code of Practice and the implications of AI-generated content
particularly regarding their discipline.
3.2.2 Staff should encourage exploration of ethical issues related to AI, such as bias,
deepfakes, copyright infringement, data security and privacy, with a focus on AI-augmented
human creativity. Students should be supported to understand the ethical use of generative
AI tools, that enhance the learning experience, not replace their own work.
3.2.3 Staff should ensure students are provided with guidance on the ethical use of
generative AI through signposting students to the Gen AI academic skills guidance . It is
recommended to undertake a specific learning activity on ethics in module delivery, for
example covering the responsible use of AI tools, awareness of biases, and the potential for
misuse.
3.2.4 Staff should remind students that they must disclose when AI tools have been used in
their work, that they require proper citation and refer them to the Academic Misconduct
Code of Practice
3.2.5 Staﬀ should be careful to manage “cognitive oﬄoading” through a balance of AI and
non-AI activities. Cognitive oﬄoading is this context is where studies show that students
Page 3 of 6

using AI assistants may perform better than those with traditional assistance (such as paperbased handouts) while they rely on AI, but that they learn less and perform less well when
the AI is removed.
3.3 Staff will be supported to adapt their teaching learning and assessment methods to
incorporate ethical use of Gen AI
3.3.1 Active Learning is one of our Curriculum Expectations and we should explore how AI
can support active learning and collaboration either during synchronous sessions, in person
or online or as part of asynchronous activities, for example to support group work, inquirybased learning, discussion or formative feedback.
3.3.2Integration of AI tools should involve appropriate scaffolding, providing students with
activities and resources that help them understand the capabilities and limitations of AI and
ensuring students can practice necessary skills. Identify key opportunities to introduce or
discuss AI concepts and applications, using case studies and examples to illustrate them.
3.3.3 Assessment methods should be reviewed to ensure that they remain fair, transparent,
and resistant to the misuse of AI. Staﬀ should consider how AI can provide opportunities for
more authentic assessment types, to enable personalisation and to potentially reduce overassessing. AI tools and outputs must be tested before assessment design to understand their
capabilities and limitations.
3.3.4 AI provides a signiﬁcant opportunity to develop and enhance critical evaluation skills in
students, for example, evaluating AI-generated output(s) based on accuracy, relevance,
credibility, and potential bias. AI models are only as good as the data they are trained on; if
the training data is biased, the output will likely reﬂect that bias; the output may not be
relevant to the prompt, may contain errors and may draw on unreliable or out of date
sources. Responsible use means critically evaluating AI in this way and ensures AI outputs
are managed eﬀectively and responsibly. A starting point would be to identify key skills
required relating to the use of AI in a subject speciﬁc context and to foster critical evaluation
of AI outputs.
3.3.5 Students must be advised on how AI can be used in assessments, and this must be
clearly stated, as outlined in the Assessment and Feedback Code of Practice
3.3.6 AI can enhance and diversify learning and teaching to make it more inclusive. We
should consider how appropriate use of AI supports the expectations set out in the Inclusive
Education Framework in the design of teaching and learning activities and learning
resources. We should ensure that assessments using AI remain inclusive and do not alienate
students who have legitimate concerns, whether they are philosophical, ethical,
environmental or cultural. Where AI is used it must be to support learning, not as a
replacement for it.
3.3.7 AI resources can be used to enhance and demonstrate the value of formative
approaches to assessment, the process of learning as well as outcomes. When developing
assessments, staﬀ are encouraged to consider activities that explore opportunities and
challenges of AI, e.g. discussions on ethical implications, societal and environmental impact;
Page 4 of 6

activities encouraging students to identify potential biases in AI outputs and assess the
credibility and reliability of online sources and the role of intellectual property (IP).
3.4 Staff and students will have fair access to Gen AI tools and resources needed for
teaching and learning
3.4.1 Staff should ensure equitable access to generative AI tools and resources for all
students regardless of background, location, or personal financial situation; ensuring all staff
and students have the necessary resources for teaching and learning and removing potential
barriers such as economic disadvantage or digital accessibility, to ensure inclusivity in AI
adoption. For this reason, it is recommended that staff use institutional Gen AI tools, for
example Microsoft Copilot, that comply with GDPR and relevant privacy regulations.
3.4.2 Staff must communicate to students the AI tools and platforms that are available to
them and ensure that inclusive approaches are followed, such as students with diverse
needs (e.g., disabilities or those from low-income backgrounds) have access to AI tools and
assistive technologies.
3.4.3 Staﬀ should make students aware that AI is already integrated into the key tools used
by the university; for example, Microsoft Oﬃce 365 deploys AI in email and PowerPoint and
AI is embedded into the KLE along with other third-party tools that the university uses for
teaching and learning. Microsoft Copilot is the institutional tool available free to staﬀ and
students as part of the MS Oﬃce 365 suite. Use of other AI tools must consider accessibility
and equitable access along with GDPR and data privacy.
3.5 Academic integrity will be upheld in all assessments and associated policies will be
reviewed regularly as generative AI tools develop
3.5.1 Assessment methods should be reviewed regularly to ensure that they continue to
adapt to the growing presence and capabilities of generative AI tools, to reduce
vulnerabilities to AI misuse while promoting authentic learning.
3.5.2 AI-driven content must be treated with transparency, ensuring that students are not
penalised for using AI responsibly.
3.6 Best practice will be shared across and beyond the institution as technology and the
application of technology in education develops.
3.6.1 Our ethos is to support a culture of collaboration and innovation and to develop
scholarship in AI. We will communicate best practice in AI in teaching and learning across
the institution, disseminating internal case studies via the intranet and through workshops
and guidance. Staff will be supported through the launch of a new self-enrol AI for
Educators course on Blackboard Ultra, AI Exploration days and workshops on Critical AI
Literacy including assessment, active learning and ethical use.
3.6.2 Staff should ensure there are regular feedback loops from students to inform ongoing
improvements in AI adoption in teaching and learning and assessment.
Page 5 of 6

3.6.3 Through engaging with sector wide institutions and academic networks we will learn
from others’ experience in order to stay ahead of AI trends in education and update our
resources and academic development training accordingly.
4. Related Policies and Procedures
4.1 Related Policies
Captured Content
IT Acceptable Use
Data Classification and Handling Policy
Information Security Policy
4.2 Relevant Codes of Practice
Assessment and Feedback Code of Practice
Inclusive Education Framework
4.3 Relevant Guidance
Keele AI Principles in Education
Use of Gen AI in Higher Education
Keele Learning Principles
Student Guidance on Academic Integrity
Gen AI Guidance for Students
5. Support and Resources (KIITE)
AI for Educators course on Blackboard Ultra
AI (Learning Innovation Technology) Teams Channel
AI Resource Hub (Sharepoint)

Page 6 of 6
