Code Of Practice On Assessment. Appendix L.
Academic Integrity Policy. 2026-27
Academic Integrity Policy
1. Introduction
1.1 Academic integrity is concerned with the ethical code that applies to the

standards by which the academic community operates. It represents the values
of honesty, fairness and respect for others. While this encompasses the

expectation that students will not cheat in assessments nor deliberately try to

mislead examiners and assessors, it is just as important to emphasise the positive
role that academic integrity plays in each student’s intellectual and professional
development and in their successful transition to graduate employment and

future careers. Students who embrace academic integrity understand that they
must produce their own work, acknowledging explicitly any material that has

been included from other sources or legitimate collaboration, and to present their
own findings, conclusions or data based on appropriate and ethical practice. In

accordance with Appendix D, each School/Department should have an Academic
Integrity Officer, who is a member of academic staff. The Academic Integrity
Officer will conduct investigations into allegations of Academic Misconduct.

1.2 There are conventions of academic practice, such as established referencing
and citation protocols, which both display and ensure academic integrity. The
acquisition of relevant study skills such as effective note-taking, the ability to

critically evaluate other writers’ theories and concepts and presentation skills, will
help students to understand these conventions. Failure to adhere to these

conventions can result in poor academic practice or, if there is dishonesty, in
academic misconduct.

1.3 The policy sets out the process to be followed where matters of academic

integrity are identified and the penalties to be applied where academic integrity
issues are established.

1.4 There are four academic integrity categories. Category 1 is distinct from

Categories 2-4. Category 1 is determined by the academic judgement of the

marker/assessor and covers practice where there has been failure, due to lack of
academic ability or understanding, to observe the expected standards

Approved by Senate chair’s action September 2025; for AY 2025-26

CODE OF PRACTICE ON ASSESSMENT – APPENDIX L Academic Integrity Policy 202627

associated with academic integrity when undertaking academic work. Category 2
captures first offences in which dishonesty can be established or inferred.

Category 3 covers offences where dishonesty can be established. Category 4

covers inherently dishonest acts where a student intends to gain an advantage

over other students by wilfully seeking to deceive assessors and/or examiners.
Such acts are often but not always premeditated and would include offences
subsequent to a prior written warning of academic malpractice.

1.5 No student with an unresolved academic integrity matter against them can
graduate, including those students who have registered an appeal against a
decision taken against them with regards to academic integrity.

1.6 Personal Extenuating Circumstances (PECs) will not be accepted as a good
reason for committing academic misconduct. Where a student has PECs

accepted in relation to an assessment but is found to have committed academic
misconduct in that same assessment, then the academic misconduct penalty
shall overrule any personal extenuating circumstances decision. PECs can be
taken into account to mitigate the extent of a penalty for Category 2, 3 or 4

offences by the Academic Integrity Committee who may recommend to the

Board of Examiners that the penalty be reduced and providing the rationale for
this in the context of accepted PECs.

2. Scope of this policy
This policy applies to all (undergraduate and postgraduate) taught students
throughout their period of registration with the University including:
•

Students studying for a University of Liverpool award who spend any time
off campus (such as placement, year abroad/in industry, off-site

research);

•

Students studying for a University of Liverpool award wholly online including

•

The academic integrity policy and procedures for students studying for a

those studying with online partners;

single University of Liverpool award or a joint or dual award of the University
with one or more institutional partners, under a specific collaborative

agreement, will be made explicit in that agreement and students will be
informed of these arrangements when they register.

Approved by Senate chair’s action September 2025; for AY 2025-26

CODE OF PRACTICE ON ASSESSMENT – APPENDIX L Academic Integrity Policy 202627

2.1 Acts or allegations relating to misconduct in research will be considered under
the University’s Policy on Misconduct in Research. All allegations of potential
misconduct in research must be referred to the Named Person

(integrity@liverpool.ac.uk) for initial assessment in accordance with the University
Policy on Misconduct in Research.

This policy does not apply to work submitted for formal assessment that is

undertaken under invigilated examination conditions. This should be dealt with in
accordance with ‘Academic Misconduct Policy and Procedures’ (Appendix D
Annexe 4 of the Code of Practice on Assessment):

Acts that would be subject to the University’s Disciplinary or Fitness to Practise
procedures will be dealt with under those procedures:
•

•

Conduct Discipline

Fitness to Practise Policy and Procedures

The policy for dealing with plagiarism, collusion copying, submission of

commissioned or procured work or dishonest use of data in research degrees is
addressed in a separate policy document.

3. Definitions
The following definitions reflect those contained within Section 9 of the Code of
Practice on Assessment and apply to all types of work submitted by students,

including online assessments. Examples include, but are not limited to: written
work, diagrams, designs, charts, multimedia production, programs, musical
compositions or pictures.

3.1 Poor Academic Practice
Poor academic practice occurs where there has been a failure, due to lack of
academic ability or understanding, to observe the expected standards

associated with academic integrity when undertaking academic work. Examples
of poor academic practice include but are not limited to; poor paraphrasing or
inadequate referencing (including the inadequate referencing of content
generated by Artificial Intelligence software when use is permitted).
3.2 Collusion
Collusion occurs when, unless with official approval (e.g. in the case of group

projects), two or more students consciously collaborate in the preparation and

production of work that is ultimately submitted by each student in an identical or

Approved by Senate chair’s action September 2025; for AY 2025-26

CODE OF PRACTICE ON ASSESSMENT – APPENDIX L Academic Integrity Policy 202627

substantially similar form and/or is represented by each to be the product of their
individual efforts.
3.3 Copying
Copying occurs when a student consciously presents as their own work material

copied directly from a fellow student or other person. It includes the passing-off of

another’s intellectual property or ideas as one’s own. It differs from collusion in
that the originator of the copied work is not aware of or party to the copying.
Copying of work from published sources would be dealt with as plagiarism.
3.4 Submission of Commissioned or Procured Assessment Tasks

This example of dishonest practice occurs when a student submits, as their own
work, assessment tasks (or parts thereof) that have been intentionally procured

from third parties. The definition includes the practice of requesting another party
to prepare all or part of a course assignment (with or without payment) on the
student’s behalf. The definition also includes proofreading activities whereby a

third party or software application exceeds the acceptable practice of identifying
errors or inconsistencies in a course assignment by adding to or rewriting the

student’s existing content. Acceptable proof-reading practice would include the
identification of typographical, grammatical or spelling errors, formatting or

citation errors or inconsistencies, repetition or duplication of text, ambiguous

wording, and mislabelling of graphs, diagrams etc. Unacceptable proof-reading
practice would include adding to content, rewriting any content, checking or

correcting facts, data, equations, etc. Further to this, the assignment brief should
be clear on whether, or the extent to which, translation software or equivalent
tools may be used.

3.5 Submission of Assessment Tasks Generated by Artificial Intelligence
This dishonest practice occurs when a student presents assessment tasks (or

parts thereof) that have been generated or completed by Generative Artificial
Intelligence (GAI) software contrary to the guidance on using GAI: 1

Each assignment brief should state whether the use of GAI is in line with the

1

generic University position and where it is not, provide specific requirements of

that assignment. If the use of GAI is not permitted within an assignment but the

student uses it to produce work and then cites it, this is a case of acknowledged
by unacceptable use as per 5.3.

Approved by Senate chair’s action September 2025; for AY 2025-26

CODE OF PRACTICE ON ASSESSMENT – APPENDIX L Academic Integrity Policy 202627

GAI software, for the purposes of this policy, is defined as software applications
that create content in any form (including but not limited to text, graphs, data,

code, images, audio and video) automatically based on the prompt of the user.
3.6 Dishonest Use of Data
Throughout this policy the term “dishonest use of data” is used to cover one or
more of the following:

Embellishment or Falsification of Data – occurs when a proportion of the total

data is altered, enhanced or exaggerated in order to emphasise data which has
been obtained by legitimate means.

Fabrication of Data – occurs when a student creates and presents an extensive

amount or significant piece of data in order to conceal a lack of legitimate data,
or wholly fabricates a set of data in the absence of legitimate data.

Unapproved Collection of Data – occurs when data is presented that has not
been legitimately obtained, including data collected without relevant ethical
approval, or collected beyond the scope of the obtained ethical approval.
In this context ‘data’ includes literature and sources.
3.7 Plagiarism
Plagiarism occurs when a student misrepresents the work or ideas of any other
person (including another student) or of any institution, as their own work.
Examples of forms of plagiarism include:
•

•

the verbatim (word for word) copying of another’s work without

appropriate and correctly presented acknowledgement and citation of the
source;

the close paraphrasing of another’s work by simply changing a few words,
altering the order of presentation, or using software applications to

paraphrase another’s work without appropriate and correctly presented
•

acknowledgement and citation of the original source(s);

the manual or machine translation of the work of any other person

(including another student), or of any institution originally developed in a

language other than English, without appropriate and correctly presented

acknowledgement and citation of the original source. Where GAI has been

used to translate work, citation for both the original work and the GAI
application used should be provided;

Approved by Senate chair’s action September 2025; for AY 2025-26

CODE OF PRACTICE ON ASSESSMENT – APPENDIX L Academic Integrity Policy 202627

•

failure to reference appropriately or to adequately identify the source of

•

unacknowledged quotation of phrases from another’s work;

•

material used;

the deliberate and detailed presentation of another’s concept as one’s
own.

3.8 Self-Plagiarism / Re-use of work
Self-plagiarism is considered a breach of academic integrity and includes the
reuse of material that the student has previously submitted for assessment,
without appropriate acknowledgement or permission.

Students must not present work they have previously submitted for credit as if it is
new, unless they have explicit permission and appropriately reference the prior
work. This includes work submitted to the current course or for another

qualification at this, or any other, university. This excludes resit tasks on the same
assessment task, unless the resit assessment brief explicitly requires new
materials. This rule also applies to those resitting a year of study.

The University treats the decision as to whether poor academic practice or unfair
and/or dishonest academic practice has taken place as a matter for academic
judgement 2 and the penalties applied will vary according to the individual case
and the seriousness of the offence (for details of the range of penalties, see
Section 5 below.)

4. Dealing with Academic Integrity Issues
4.1 Departments 3 should require students, when submitting work for summative
assessment, to provide either a signed hard-copy declaration or an equivalent

acknowledgement where electronic submission is used, to confirm that they have
not plagiarised nor copied material, nor have they embellished, fabricated nor
falsified any of the data, nor have they colluded in producing the work, nor

submitted commissioned or procured work, or are submitting work produced

2

It should be noted that where plagiarism or other another offence is indicated using

detection software, Examiners, Assessment Integrity Officers and Board of Examiners must
still exercise academic judgement in determining whether plagiarism or another offence
has taken place.

3

The departmental responsibility referred to here should fall to the relevant appropriate

body in the case of on-line programmes.

Approved by Senate chair’s action September 2025; for AY 2025-26

CODE OF PRACTICE ON ASSESSMENT – APPENDIX L Academic Integrity Policy 202627

using artificial intelligence contrary to this policy and the guidance for acceptable
and unacceptable use of GAI.

4.2 If the examiner identifies an academic integrity issue within a student’s work,
they should ensure that this is evidenced and documented and should then
proceed as follows:

4.3 If the examiner identifies that a student has committed poor academic

practice in which there is no evidence of dishonesty or intention to deceive, the

examiner shall conclude that a Category 1 offence has occurred and shall apply
the penalty as outlined in Section 5 below.

4.4 If the examiner suspects any form of academic misconduct in relation to work
submitted by a student, they should inform the Academic Integrity Officer 4 for the

Department /School that owns that module as promptly as possible, who will
undertake an investigation into the allegation on behalf of the Chair of the
relevant Academic Integrity Committee 5.

4.5 Allegations about plagiarism, copying, collusion, submission of unacceptable

artificial intelligence generated assessment tasks, dishonest use of data, unfair or
dishonest academic practice in relation to work submitted by a student may also
be raised by another member of academic staff (not the examiner) or a third
party. Such concerns should be documented and supported by evidence.

Anonymous allegations will not normally be investigated, but the chair of the
Academic Integrity Committee should use their discretion as to if there are

grounds for any investigation and if there are grounds, the chair should forward

them to the Academic Integrity Officer to investigate. In cases of allegation from a
third party, the Academic Integrity Officer for the Department /School that owns

the relevant module should be notified of these concerns as promptly as possible,
who will undertake an investigation into the allegation on behalf of the Chair of
the relevant Academic Integrity Committee.

4.6 In undertaking their investigation, the Academic Integrity Officer will first check
the student’s record to ascertain if the student has a support plan which permits
them to use particular software as a reasonable adjustment. The Academic

4

The corresponding officer for online programmes delivered in partnership with Kaplan

Open Learning is the Director of Online Studies
5

Notwithstanding a referral for investigation, a raw mark for the assessment should be

calculated and marked on the script.

Approved by Senate chair’s action September 2025; for AY 2025-26

CODE OF PRACTICE ON ASSESSMENT – APPENDIX L Academic Integrity Policy 202627

Integrity Officer will also invite the examiner to provide evidence and reasons for
their allegation.

4.7 When the Academic Integrity Officer is informed of an allegation, they will

commence their investigation and will have up to 10 working days from this point
to notify the student(s) of the investigation, including details of the alleged

offence. The notification will include an invitation to the student(s) to contribute to
the investigation by providing a written explanation of the circumstances

surrounding the allegation and any representations they wish to make. The

student will have 5 working days to respond. If a student chooses not to engage

with the investigation, the investigation will proceed and a decision will be made
based on the evidence available.

4.8 The Academic Integrity Officer may hold a meeting with the student(s). The

student(s) should be given sufficient notice of any meeting, normally a minimum
of three working days. The student(s) is entitled to be accompanied at any

meeting by one other person (not party to the matters under investigation) acting
as their friend. The Guild of Students Advice Centre (Liverpool Guild) has trained

advisors who can provide this support and students are encouraged to use them.
The student will also be provided with contact details of the University’s Advice

and Guidance Team so they know how to access wellbeing support should they
feel they need it.

4.9 A summary note of what is discussed during any meeting will be taken and
following the meeting, the student will be provided with a copy of this note.

4.10 On completion of the investigation, the Academic Integrity Officer will produce
an investigation report and evidence base and, will conclude that:
(a)

(b)

The evidence does not support that academic misconduct has likely

occurred. The student(s) will be informed accordingly, and no further
action is required; or

The evidence supports that poor academic practice has likely occurred.
The Academic Integrity Officer shall conclude that a Category 1 offence
has occurred and shall apply a penalty in accordance with Section 5

(c)

below; or

The evidence supports that plagiarism, copying, collusion, submission of
unacceptable artificial intelligence generated assessment tasks,

dishonest use of data or unfair or dishonest academic practice has

more likely than not occurred. The Academic Integrity Officer shall refer

Approved by Senate chair’s action September 2025; for AY 2025-26

CODE OF PRACTICE ON ASSESSMENT – APPENDIX L Academic Integrity Policy 202627

their investigation report and evidence base to the relevant

Department/School Academic Integrity Committee (AIC) for further

consideration 6. A copy of the Academic Integrity Officer’s report and

evidence base will also be sent to the student(s).

The student(s) will have the opportunity to comment in writing on any factual

inaccuracies within the report and/or remind staff of any personal extenuating
circumstances which may justify a mitigated penalty (see 1.6). Staff may also
consider as a mitigating factor that students admitted the offence promptly
and/or showed remorse and consider (as 1.6) a lesser penalty.

4.11 In the case of 4.10(c) above, the Department/School Academic Integrity

Committee shall review the investigation report and supporting evidence and will
check the student’s record to ascertain any previous Academic Integrity cases

and/or warnings issued as well as review any comments on factual inaccuracies

and mitigation against the implementation of a penalty provided and shall make
a recommendation to the Board of Examiners regarding whether a breach of the
academic integrity policy has taken place. If the AIC recommends that a breach
of the academic integrity policy has taken place the AIC will also make a

recommendation to the Board of Examiners regarding the category of offence

that has taken place and the penalty to be applied in line with Section 5 below.
4.12 The Board of Examiners will consider the recommendations of the AIC and

decide if it accepts that a breach of the Academic Integrity Policy has taken place
and consider the recommendations of the AIC as to the category of the offence
and the penalty to be applied. Neither the Academic Integrity Officer nor the

examiner or any other member who considered the case at AIC can take part in
the decision-making taken by the Board of Examiner.

4.13 The Board of Examiners should ensure that the minutes of the Board’s
meeting accurately record the decision-making process; if it rejects the

recommendations of the AIC in whole or part, the rationale for this should be

recorded in the minutes. The Board is also responsible for ensuring the decision is
noted in the student’s record, including their record on Banner.

6

The Academic Integrity Committee is a sub-committee of the Board of Examiners and

should comprise at least three members of the Board of Examiners, one of whom may not
be the Academic Integrity Officer.

Approved by Senate chair’s action September 2025; for AY 2025-26

CODE OF PRACTICE ON ASSESSMENT – APPENDIX L Academic Integrity Policy 202627

4.14 The Chair of the Academic Integrity Committee should provide summary

data on academic misconduct to the Head of Department, for inclusion in an

annual report on academic misconduct to the relevant Faculty Academic Quality
and Standards Committee/Faculty Education and Enhancement Committee.

Faculties should then provide a report on matters of academic integrity to AQSC.
The summary data should indicate:
•

For Category 2, 3 and 4, the total number of proven cases by modules

•

The total number of Category 1 cases that resulted in the imposition of a

affected and by Category

penalty

6-The Academic Integrity Committee is a sub-committee of the Board of

Examiners and should comprise at least three members of the Board of
Examiners, one of whom may not be the Academic Integrity Officer.

5. Categories and Indicative Penalties
This section outlines the different categories of academic integrity offences as

well as indicative penalties for each. Where there is any discretion or choice about
the penalty to be applied, consideration may be given to the student’s level and

year of study, any previous history of academic misconduct, the weighting of the
assessment, any aggravating factors including whether the student was

dishonest or attempted to mislead the Academic Integrity Officer during the

investigation, and the penalties that have previously been issued in similar cases,
in order to maintain consistency and fairness.

Category 1: Poor Academic Practice
5.1 If a student is found to have committed poor academic practice:
•

the assessment task mark shall be capped at the minimum pass grade for

•

the examiner should indicate the student’s errors in the assessment

•

•

that assessment task by the examiner.

feedback so that they can learn from their mistakes. The feedback should
also indicate how the student could improve their practice;

the examiner will recommend the student to complete an on-line Know

How academic integrity tutorial and, if appropriate, an Artificial Intelligence
Literacy tutorial;

the mark penalty will be reported to the Academic Integrity Committee for
note only and will be recorded by the Board of Examiners, and notified to
the student;

Approved by Senate chair’s action September 2025; for AY 2025-26

CODE OF PRACTICE ON ASSESSMENT – APPENDIX L Academic Integrity Policy 202627

•

the student’s entitlement to re-assessment in failed modules is not

affected.

5.2 If poor academic practice is repeated by the student the mark penalty will be
imposed for each multiple or subsequent example of poor academic practice.

This creates a strong incentive for the student to avoid further penalty and should
encourage the student to benefit from the advisory on-line Know How academic

integrity tutorial or Artificial Intelligence Literacy tutorial. The completion of on-line
tutorials will be registered.

Category 2: Plagiarism, Copying, Collusion, Submission of Unacceptable
Artificial Intelligence Generated Assessment Tasks or Embellishment or
Falsification of Data

5.3 This category is intended to capture instances of plagiarism, copying,

collusion, submission of unacceptable but acknowledged artificial intelligence

generated assessment tasks or embellishment or falsification of data, where the
student has not received a prior written warning of misconduct (i.e. it is their first
offence).

5.4 If two or more students are found to have colluded in producing a piece of

assessed work (this includes one student allowing another to copy their work and
submit it as their own), then each should receive the mark penalty for the

assessment task. If one or more students are found to have copied the work of

another student in any form without their knowledge, then any resulting warning
and penalty should apply only to the student(s) that copied the work.

5.5 Normally, if a student is found to have committed a first offence of plagiarism,
copying, collusion, submission of unacceptable artificial intelligence generated
assessment tasks or embellishment of falsification of data:
•

the assessment task should be given a mark of zero;

•

the student will be given a written warning about the need to observe the

•

the student will be recommended to take or retake the on-line Know How

University’s Academic Integrity Policy;

academic integrity tutorial and, if appropriate, the Artificial Intelligence
Literacy tutorial;

Approved by Senate chair’s action September 2025; for AY 2025-26

CODE OF PRACTICE ON ASSESSMENT – APPENDIX L Academic Integrity Policy 202627

•

•

a note will be placed on the student’s records, including their records in

Banner 7 detailing the nature of the offence, the action and the date of the

issue of any written warning;

the student’s entitlement to re-assessment in failed modules is not
affected.

5.6 After five working days from the date of the first written warning, any

subsequent work submitted by the student in which plagiarism, copying,
collusion, submission of unacceptable artificial intelligence generated

assessment tasks or embellishment or falsification of data have occurred will be
treated as Category 3. Any offence detected in work submitted within the five UK

working days from the first written warning will be treated as a Category 2 breach
of the policy.

5.7 In the case of a student being awarded a mark of zero and as a result failing
their dissertation or project, the Board of Examiners will decide whether they
should be permitted to re-submit the dissertation or project, revised and

corrected, or whether they must complete and submit a whole new dissertation or

project.

Category 3: Second or Subsequent Category 2 Offence(s) following a
Written Warning

5.8 This category is intended to cover instances of plagiarism, copying, collusion,

submission of unacceptable artificial intelligence generated assessment tasks or

embellishment or falsification of data and the student has received a prior written
warning of academic misconduct for such a category of offence dated more
than five UK working days earlier.

5.9 If two or more students are found to have colluded in producing a piece of

assessed work (this includes one student allowing another to copy their work and
submit it as their own), then each should receive the mark penalty for the

assessment task. If one or more students are found to have copied the work of

another student in any form without their knowledge, then any resulting warning
and penalty should apply only to the student(s) that copied the work.

7

In respect of this and all references to Banner in this Policy it should be noted that for on-

line programmes an alternative records system may be used.

Approved by Senate chair’s action September 2025; for AY 2025-26

CODE OF PRACTICE ON ASSESSMENT – APPENDIX L Academic Integrity Policy 202627

5.10 Normally, if, after receiving a written warning, a student is found to have

committed second or subsequent plagiarism, copying, collusion, submission of
unacceptable.

artificial intelligence generated assessment tasks or embellishment or
falsification of data:
•

the student should be given zero for the module, regardless of any other

•

the student will be given a second written warning about the need to

•

•

•

assessment component marks for the module;

observe the University’s Academic Integrity Policy;

the student will be recommended to take or retake the on-line Know How

academic integrity tutorial and if relevant the Artificial Intelligence Literacy
tutorial;

a note will be placed on the student’s records, including their records in

Banner detailing the nature of the offence, the action and the date of the
issue of any written warning;

the student’s entitlement to re-sit failed modules is not affected.

5.11 In the case of a student being awarded a mark of zero and as a result failing
their dissertation or project, the Board of Examiners will decide whether they
should be permitted to re-submit the dissertation or project, revised and

corrected, or whether they must complete and submit a whole new dissertation or
project.

Category 4: Unfair and/or Dishonest Academic Practice
5.12 This category covers inherently dishonest acts where a student intends to

gain an advantage over other students by wilfully seeking to deceive assessors

and/or examiners and where a clear intent to deceive and gain unfair advantage
can be established. Examples include the use of purchased or commissioned

work, the submission of unacceptable and unacknowledged artificial intelligence
generated assessment tasks, unacceptable proof-reading practices, passing off

as one’s own work the work of another student or person, fabrication of data, and
coercive collusion. The practices in this category are defined as those serious

enough even as a first offence to warrant suspension or termination of studies
and do not depend on a student’s prior actions

5.13 In a case of submission of unacceptable and unacknowledged artificial

intelligence generated assessment tasks and/ or data fabrication, this must be

Approved by Senate chair’s action September 2025; for AY 2025-26

CODE OF PRACTICE ON ASSESSMENT – APPENDIX L Academic Integrity Policy 202627

extensive to merit a Category 4 breach and it can be downgraded to category 2
based on the extent/severity – as judged by the AIC.

5.14 Normally the penalty to be applied for a Category 4 offence is a mark of zero
for the module, regardless of any other assessment component marks for the
module and either:
•

•

Suspension of studies for a period not exceeding one academic sessionor 8,

Termination of studies, with credit awarded for what has already been

passed without unfair and/or dishonest academic practice; or
•

For an undergraduate project or postgraduate dissertation or project, a
mark of zero for the module in which the offence occurred and a

reassessment of the project or dissertation on a different topic. If an

academic integrity breach occurs on this subsequent reassessment

attempt, a mark of zero for the module and consideration of an exit award
In deciding on the period of time to suspend studies for, as referred to in 5.14

above, suspension timeframes should consider the impact on progress in the

same academic year e.g. should not be taken during assessment periods. The
rationale for the period of suspension applied should be recorded to ensure
consistency. In making a judgement as to whether to suspend a student or

terminate their studies consideration should be given to the seriousness of the
offence and in this exceptional circumstance whether previous breaches of

Academic Integrity have taken place during their period of registration, and the
extent of the student engagement with the Academic Integrity process.

With regards a finding of unfair or dishonest academic practice, in exceptional
circumstances and if the Chair and the Board of Examiners is satisfied with the

findings detailed in the report, the Board can arrange for other work submitted by
the student(s) for assessment to be scrutinised for other instances of unfair or

dishonest academic practice. The Board of Examiners can only scrutinise other

work by the student that is from the year of study in which the offence took place 9

8

In the event of suspension, the mark penalty and conditions laid out in section 5.10

should also be applied to the affected module.
9

For students on programmes delivered online in partnership with Kaplan Open Learning

the period would be that since the last Board of Examiners at which marks were
confirmed.

Approved by Senate chair’s action September 2025; for AY 2025-26

CODE OF PRACTICE ON ASSESSMENT – APPENDIX L Academic Integrity Policy 202627

; the Board cannot review work from a previous year (or years) of study which the
student has already passed.

6. Right of Appeal
6.1 Students may appeal against the decision of the Board of Examiners in relation
to a Category 2, 3 or 4 decision but only on the grounds that there was a

procedural error in determining a decision in the conduct of the investigation into

the alleged offence. Students may not appeal against the decision of the Board of
Examiners other than in accordance with the Code of Practice on Assessment,
Appendix F, Assessment Appeals Procedure.

7. Academic Integrity and Fitness to Practise
7.1 For some vocational and/or professional programmes there may be

requirements for students to meet specified standards in respect of their fitness
to practise in the relevant vocation or profession. Where a finding of poor

academic practice or unfair and/or dishonest plagiarism, collusion, submission of
unacceptable Artificial Intelligence Generated assessment tasks and/or

dishonest use of data against a student may call into question the student’s

fitness to practise, this must be clearly stated in the programme information
provided to students.

Approved by Senate chair’s action September 2025; for AY 2025-26
