ACADEMIC REGULATIONS
Universal Assessment Regulations
Academic Misconduct Policy
Document Control

Responsibility for Policy:
Approved by and date:
Frequency of Review:
Next Review date:
Related Policies:
Minor Revisions:

Registrar
22nd June 2022
5 years
2027
Appeal Policy
December 2022
Clause 2. Scope
Extension of policy to include Postgraduate Research Students in
the research phase of their studies.
Removed June 2023 with approval of PGR academic misconduct
policy.
December 2022
Clause 6: Independent Consideration
Amendment to process for first cases of misconduct at Levels F
and C to remove the requirement for Independent Consideration.
June 2023
Independent Consideration available at student request not
applicable to all cases. Schools determine penalty for misconduct.
January 2023
3. Forms of Academic Misconduct
Use of Essay Writing Service, wording amended to allow inclusion
of Artificial Intelligence and confirmation that the penalty will be
termination of studies in this case.
June 2023
2.3 Clarification of how mitigating circumstances are dealt with.
December 2024
Summary scheme amended to note when evidence is sent to the
student.
June 2025
1

General housekeeping to remove reference to Departments and
outdated reference to Level rather than Year of study.
3.1 Definition of Third-Party misconduct amended to remove
reference to use of Generative AI which has been added to the list
as a separate entry.
10. Penalties
10.1 Reference to Indicative Penalties removed, now confirmed as
the ‘normal’ penalties. Added clarity that mitigating circumstances
should be resolved before any misconduct investigation.
EIA:

The policy is monitored using an annual review of available data
relating to academic misconduct cases.

2

Academic Misconduct is suspected and the case is referred to a School Senior Academic Adviser who will advise on the next
steps. Investigation takes place in the School using two academic colleagues.
Case to Answer
School writes to student advising
of Penalty and providing all
evidence to the student
End of process –
student is satisfied

Student is unsatisfied
– referral to
Independent
Consideration Panel

No Case to
answer- student
is advised of this

ICP agree with School decision and Penalty student is informed by appeals@hope.ac.uk of
the outcome of Independent Consideration

If student is unsatisfied with the outcome the student
may submit an Academic Appeal after formal
publication of results (see appeals process)
3

Case to Answer
School refer case to an Academic
Misconduct Panel

ICP does not agree with School decision
and/ or penalty. If resolution with the School
cannot be reached. matter is referred to an
Academic Misconduct Panel via
appeals@hope.ac.uk
If the student is not satisfied a review can
be requested from Deputy Vice
Chancellor if certain grounds are met.
Student is advised of DVC decision.

1. Introduction
1.1. The University uses assessment to determine whether a student has met the
essential outcomes of their academic program. Assessments are designed to be
equitable for all our students, and likewise we expect our students to behave with
integrity.
1.2. Academic misconduct is defined as:
“any action or omission which gives or has the potential to give an unfair advantage
in an examination or assessment, or might assist someone to gain an unfair
advantage, or any activity likely to undermine the integrity essential to scholarship and
research”.
1.3. Academic misconduct includes unintentional acts, where students have not
familiarised themselves with good academic practice.
1.4. Matters of academic misconduct are decided on a balance of probabilities. The
university applies a strict liability policy whereby student’s intentions are irrelevant
when deciding if academic misconduct took place.
2. Scope
2.1. This policy applies to undergraduates, graduate, taught postgraduates, and taught
phases of postgraduate research degrees. This policy applies to students enrolled on
a course for assessments delivered in whole by the University, or in whole or part by
a sub contractual partner institution (franchise provision).
2.2. Where relevant, other university policies and procedures (such as those relating to
discipline, fitness to practise or research misconduct) may be used as well as or
instead of this policy.
2.3. Mitigating circumstances cannot be considered in relation to academic misconduct.
Any panel hearing held under this Policy is not permitted to take into consideration
mitigating circumstances. These should be dealt with in accordance with the
University Mitigating Circumstances Policy.
2.4. The University has a ‘fit to sit’ policy and as such mitigating circumstances can only
be considered through the Mitigating Circumstances Policy, or, in exceptional cases,
through the Academic Appeals Policy.
3. Forms of Academic Misconduct
3.1. Academic misconduct may take a number of forms. The following is not an
exhaustive list:
Plagiarism
This happens where a student incorporates the work of others
(published or unpublished) in their own work without properly
acknowledging it. Students are effectively claiming ownership for
4

work that is not their own. This includes word for-word borrowing
as well as copying with minor changes. ‘Work’ is not limited to
text, but also includes statistics, assembled facts or arguments,
designs, images, models, figures, computer programs,
photographs, pictures or diagrams. Students must follow the
correct referencing guidelines provided by their Academic team.
Self
Plagiarism/
Recycling

A student using the same work for a new assessment that was
submitted for a previous summative assessment. The following
cases ARE NOT considered (or, DO NOT fall) under the rubric of
self-plagiarism/ recycling: students who are resubmitting or “representing” failed work to reach a minimum threshold; students
who are taking a block of study for a second time with
attendance; students who include in examination answers
material previously included in coursework answers, unless this
is explicitly forbidden by the exam regulations.

Use of third
parties

Essay writing services, buying or otherwise obtaining work
online or elsewhere through use of available software which a
student then submits for assessment. Commissioning an essay
from any third party is fraud.

Use of
Generative
Artificial
Intelligence

GenAI can be a valuable learning aid, but should never be used
as a substitute for production of original assessed work. It is not
acceptable to present AI-generated content; unacknowledged
submission of summative assessment generated by AI is
considered misconduct. Students should consult the acceptable
uses policy of the University.

Fraudulent or
fabricated
coursework

For example: reports of practical work that is untrue and/ or
made up; fabrication of research or dishonest interpretation of
data; unethical research practice.

Cheating in
examinations

Through impersonation; taking into the examination unauthorised
materials, mobile phones or other electronic devices; copying
from other students or from notes.

Collusion

Submitting work produced jointly with another student (except
where the terms of the assessment require collaboration).

Deception

Faking mitigating circumstances in relation to an assessment.

Breaching
ethical
standards

Where a student was explicitly required to obtain ethical approval
before collecting data, they must not collect data without such
permission having been granted. Beginning a research study
without ethical approval will be considered in light of both
academic misconduct and the student code of discipline.
Students must not violate any condition imposed in writing as
part of granting ethical approval for the project nor should they
amend the study design without obtaining relevant approval.

Bribery

obtaining material relating to assessment, with the intention of
gaining unfair advantage, through the offering of inducements.

5

3.2. Being accused of academic misconduct is a serious offence in the University and has
the potential to result in a number of penalties depending on the stage a student is at
in their studies and the severity of the offence. It can mean that the student
(a) is required to resubmit the work;
(b) is given a capped mark;
(c) is given a mark of zero for either the assessment or the block of study
(d) in the most serious cases, a student’s studies may be terminated.
3.3. If a student withdraws from the course during this procedure they will not be allowed to
return to study until the University has investigated the matter and notified the student
of the outcome. In any requests for a reference, it will record where a disciplinary
matter is outstanding.
3.4. Findings of academic misconduct may be recorded on a student’s transcript. Where
this is the case, the University may refer to this information in character references or
notify any relevant professional body.
3.5. Students subject to this Policy should seek independent advice from the Students’
Union Advice Service because they have experience of supporting and advising
students during academic misconduct proceedings. Students can be supported by one
of the Student Union advisers at any stage of this Policy.
3.6. The University recognises that in the early part of a student’s studies mistakes may be
made. At the same time, the University expects students to learn from these mistakes
and not to repeat them. If the circumstances on any alleged misconduct suggests that
if a student intended to gain an unfair advantage, the University will take this very
seriously and may apply a more severe penalty.
3.7. It is the university’s responsibility to establish that academic misconduct is more likely
than not to have taken place.
4. Investigating Academic Misconduct
The type of action taken will depend on the academic misconduct that is being
investigated.
4.1. Examinations
4.1.1.
4.1.2.
4.1.3.

If a student is suspected of cheating in an examination, the invigilator
will make a note on the student’s examination script and remove any
suspect objects.
The student will be allowed to finish the examination.
At the end of the examination, the student will be told that an
investigation will take place. The matter will be reported to the
student’s School and an investigation will take place.

4.2. Assessments
6

If a student is suspected of academic misconduct in an assessment other than an
examination, this concern will be reported to/ handled by the student’s School, which
will decide whether a further investigation is warranted, who will record the decision
and the reasons for it.
4.3. The person who is investigating the allegation will determine the best way of doing
this. This person will normally be the School Senior Academic Adviser (SAA). The
investigation may include the use of plagiarism detection software. The student may
also be asked to provide their notes, drafts and any other records relating to their
preparatory work for the assessment. They may be asked to attend a viva voce
where this is appropriate to the investigation. Any failure to provide this material/
attend a viva voce is likely to be considered when a decision is made about potential
academic misconduct. The student may also be asked a series of questions to be
able to demonstrate that the work is theirs.
4.4. The role of the SAA is to liaise with the person raising the initial concern, to guide
them in collating the evidence and to make an academic judgment on whether there
is a case to answer. The SAA does not decide that academic misconduct has
occurred.
5. Role of the School
5.1 Once the investigation described above is complete, and normally within ten working
days of the concern first arising, the student will be given a copy of all the evidence. The
student will be invited to a meeting at the School. At least two members of the academic
staff will be present at this meeting.
5.2 The student may be accompanied by a fellow student or officer of the Students’ Union to
provide support. The purpose of this meeting is to allow the student the chance to
comment on the evidence and respond to the allegation of academic misconduct made
against them.
5.3 At this meeting, which will be minuted and the minutes subsequently shared with the
student, the School will decide from the following outcomes:
No further Action

There is no case to be answered.

Academic
Misconduct

There is a case to be answered
If there is a case to be answered: the student will be informed
of the decision and the recommended penalty.
In serious or complex cases, the matter may be referred
directly to an Academic Misconduct Panel as set out in
section 7 below.

7

5.4

The School, in reaching a decision referred to in 5.3 above, may arrange an
academic interview with a student in the form of a viva voce. The student may be
accompanied by a fellow student or officer of the Students’ Union to provide support.
The purpose of this meeting is to establish whether misconduct has/ has not taken
place in more complex assessments including dissertations/ research projects.

5.5

If the student wishes to dispute either the finding that they have committed academic
misconduct or the appropriateness of the penalty, the student may choose to have
their case referred for Independent Consideration. If the student chooses this review
stage, they must inform the appeals@hope.ac.uk within ten working days from the
date on Panel outcome letter.

6. Independent Consideration of the School Outcome
If a student is unsatisfied with either the penalty or the outcome they may request their
case is reviewed by two members of senior academic staff (usually one of which will be
an SAA). This is known as the Independent Consideration Panel (“IC Panel”). These
will be different from the people in section 5 above who initially considered the evidence.
6.1. This Panel will consider whether:
(a) The evidence is sufficient to justify the conclusion that the student has
committed academic misconduct.
(b) The proposed penalty is appropriate in light of all the evidence and in
accordance with the guidelines set out below.
6.2 The student will not be present at the IC Panel meeting, and no representative from the
student’s School will attend. The IC Panel may dismiss the case on the basis that the
evidence does not justify a finding of academic misconduct, or it may ask the School to
investigate further and provide additional supporting evidence for its view that academic
misconduct has taken place.
6.3 If the IC Panel finds the evidence does justify a finding of academic misconduct, it may
uphold the penalty recommended by the School or substitute another penalty. It may
also decide that the matter would be more appropriately heard by a full hearing of the
Academic Misconduct Panel (AMP).
6.4 The student will be notified in writing of the outcome within five working days of the IC
Panel hearing. Completions of procedures notices will not be issued this stage, instead
they will be issued after any appeal is complete.
7. Academic Misconduct Panel
7.1. The Academic Misconduct Panel (AMP) will normally comprise the Registrar (Chair)
or the Registrar’s nominee, student administration representative (secretariat), two
members of academic staff and a representative from the Student Union. In all cases
8

the AMP must be made up of staff who had no previous involvement with the case.
The student will be notified at least five days in advance of the time and place of the
meeting.
7.2. The AMP will not include any representatives from the student’s School, in order to
ensure that its decision-making is independent.
7.3. It will consider:
(a) Whether the evidence is sufficient to justify the conclusion that the student has
committed academic misconduct.
(b) Whether the proposed penalty is appropriate in light of all the evidence and in
accordance with the guidelines set out below.
7.4. A representative from the student’s School will be present to represent the School
perspective. The student is also entitled to be present to speak on their own behalf.
7.5. The student may choose to bring a supporter to the hearing. The companion will
normally be a Students’ Union officer or trained nominee of the Students’ Union, a
member of academic staff or a student of the University. The student will be asked to
provide the name and capacity in which the supporter is attending in advance. It is
not normally expected that the student will have legal representation, but if the
student believes it is justified in the circumstances, the student should make these
reasons known to the Registrar at least three working days in advance of the
hearing. If the Registrar believes the student has established compelling grounds
for legal representation, it will be permitted.
7.6. If it is not possible to make contact with the student or if the student chooses not to
attend, the AMP may go ahead in their absence. Whether or not the student attends,
the student may submit explanations or evidence about the case in writing at least
three days in advance of the meeting, and this will be considered by the members.
7.7. The student will be informed of the outcome and of any penalty in writing, with
reasons, within five working days of the hearing. Completions of procedures notices
will not be issued this stage, instead they will be issued after any appeal is complete.
8. Academic Misconduct after a Student has Graduated
Where a case has been substantiated through the appropriate procedures the University
may apply a penalty in relation to a student who has completed their award and graduated.
The penalty may lead to the award being withdrawn either temporarily (pending completion
of further work) or permanently. The University may notify a relevant body of the matter
where necessary.
9. Right to Appeal
9.1. If the student remains dissatisfied with the confirmed academic misconduct outcome
agreed by the University Assessment, Continuation and Award Board, the student has
the right to appeal through the usual Academic Appeals process.
9

10. Penalties
10.1 The penalties that are normally applied are detailed below. Mitigating
Circumstances should not be considered as these should be resolved prior to the
misconduct investigation using the Mitigating Circumstances Policy.
Year of
Study
0

1

2

3/ Integrated
Master’s
Year 4
PGT

1st Offence

2nd Offence

3rd Offence

Formative Penalty:
assessment must be
redone prior to a
further presentation
opportunity.
Outcome is then on
merit. Students
choosing not to take
up the opportunity
will have their work
marked on merit as
originally submitted.
Formative Penalty:
assessment must be
redone prior to a
further presentation
opportunity.
Outcome is then on
merit. Students
choosing not to take
up the opportunity
will have their work
marked on merit as
originally submitted.
Resubmission of the
assessment for a
capped bare pass
outcome. No block
capping.
Resubmission of the
assessment for a
capped bare pass
outcome
Resubmission of the
assessment to
enable a capped
bare module/ block
pass outcome

Resubmission of the
assessment for a
capped bare pass
outcome. No block
capping

As for a second
offence at Level I/ H

Resubmission of the
assessment for a
capped bare pass
outcome. No block
capping.

As for a second
offence at Level I/ H

Block is awarded
outcome of 0

Termination of
Studies

Block is awarded
outcome of 0

Termination of
Studies

Block/ module is
awarded outcome of
0

Termination of
Studies

If the case has been referred to a University level hearing, those Panels may also
apply one of the Misconduct sanctions, which include:
•
•

Withdrawal from the Course
Permanent exclusion from the University.
10

10.2 If academic misconduct is identified after the student has graduated with an award,
the award may be revoked or otherwise amended, for example by reducing the
degree classification.

11
