Skip to Main Content

AI tools and academic study: Home

-

Home

-

Quick introduction to using AI tools in academic work

-

Resources

-

Referencing AI tools

-

Bias and hallucinations

Skills Guides homepage

Artificial Intelligence (AI) and academic study

This page is being updated as new content becomes available.

If you can't find the answer to your question on this page, please get in touch with the Information and Academic Skills Librarians via MyAccount.

LSBU's Policy on Student Use of Generative Artificial Intelligence (click to read)

Originality and use of Artificial Intelligence statement (click to download statement)

AI for Learning

This course is aimed at students but is also valuable for staff who support student learning. It introduces learners to the practical use of Generative AI to enhance study skills.

What students will learn:

- How AI can support learning and productivity

- Techniques for writing effective prompts

- Responsible and ethical use of AI tools in academic work

Delivery: Asynchronous, self-paced

Access:

View AI Learning on Moodle VLE

More about the course:

“This course is designed to help you understand how Artificial Intelligence (AI) can support your learning and prepare you for future careers. You’ll discover how to write effective prompts and use generative AI tools to enhance your study skills.

You’ll also explore important ethical issues around the use of Generative AI in education, so you can use these tools responsibly and effectively.

By the end of the course, you’ll receive a Certificate in AI for Learning.

LSBU's Artificial Intelligence Policy and Academic Misconduct Policy

This document indicates what is permissable in terms of using a generative AI tools to help you undertake any academic work. If you would like more help understanding the policy and want to learn about using generative AI tools ethically and responsibly, please register to attend a Skills for Success AI workshop session.

As with plagiarism, it is possible to accidentally use AI tools in a way that violates LSBU's academic misconduct policy. It's important you develop a strategy for using AI tools in your work before you start. This means you can keep track of how and when you use them, which will help you avoid accidental plagiarism/misuse and help you complete any declarations that need to be submitted with your assignments.

Please review the documents below:

-

LSBU Academic Misconduct Policy This link opens in a new window

-

LSBU Artificial Intelligence Policy This link opens in a new window

Your Skills For Success team are here to support your development in academic practices, information and digital skills, maths and stats and English language through our programme of regular workshops, drop-in support sessions and appointments – in-person and online.

Academic Practices | English Language | Digital Skills | Information Skills | Maths and Statistics

-
Last Updated: Sep 16, 2026 10:51 AM

-
URL: https://library.lsbu.ac.uk/AI-academic-study

-
Print Page

Login to LibApps

Report a problem
