ASSESSMENT INTEGRITY REGULATIONS
APPLICABLE TO ALL STUDENTS
These regulations are approved by the Academic Board

Last updated: July 2026

These regulations replace the “Regulations on Assessment Offences”. A summary of the changes
can be found here.
These regulations apply to all summative assessments submitted in or after the 2026/27 academic
year. They define breaches of assessment integrity, set out the procedures for investigating
allegations of such breaches, and establish the penalties that may be imposed where a breach is
confirmed.
All allegations for assessments submitted before 2026/27 will be considered under the regulations
that were in place at the time the assessment was submitted. These regulations should be read in
conjunction with the School’s Ethics Code, Code of Good Conduct and Assessment Integrity Staff
Guidance Notes.
Preamble
Assessment is the means by which the academic standards that students achieve are made known
to the School and beyond. It also provides students with impartial feedback on their performance.
Assessment forms a significant part of the process by which the School monitors its own standards
of teaching and student support. Students who are found to have breached assessment integrity in
any assessment submitted to the School, either by accident or especially if they deliberately cheat,
risk severe sanctions from the School which can impact their academic and future careers.
Further, it is now a criminal offence to provide, or arrange for another person to provide, contract
cheating services for students enrolled at a higher education provider in England. Students who are
found to engage in contract cheating services risk not only severe sanctions under these
regulations but the School’s Disciplinary Procedure as well, where it may be determined to refer the
matter to the Police.
What is an assessment integrity breach?
1.

All work for classes and seminars (which could include, for example, coursework
assignments, dissertations/project work, group work, presentations, posters, problem sets,
research proposals and any other work submitted to the School) must be the student's
own work. Direct quotations from other sources/materials must be placed properly within
quotation marks or indented and must be cited fully including reference to correct page
numbers. All paraphrased material must be clearly acknowledged as such with
appropriate referencing, as above. All references in a foreign language must be translated
into English. All weblinks must working at the time of submission. Infringing these
requirements, or passing off the work, content or ideas of others as the student’s own
work, whether deliberately or not, is plagiarism and may constitute a breach of these
regulations.

2.

The definition of a student's own work includes work produced by collaboration expressly
allowed by the department concerned or, at MPhil/PhD level, allowed under the
Regulations for Research Degrees. If the student has not been given permission, such
work will be considered to be the product of unauthorised collusion regardless of whether
Page 1 of 15

this is with anyone inside or outside LSE and will be considered as an integrity breach
under these regulations.
3.

The unauthorised use of Artificial Intelligence software to help with any part of a student’s
assessment is strictly prohibited. Any use of Artificial Intelligence software must strictly
comply with the requirements specified by the department responsible for the
assessment.

4.

A piece of work may only be submitted for assessment once, either to the LSE or
elsewhere. Submitting the same work, or part of that work (either formative or summative)
twice, by copying directly or by paraphrasing it, will be regarded as an integrity breach of
'self-plagiarism' and will be considered under these regulations. However, earlier
summative or formative work may be used as an element of a larger summative
assessment, provided that the amount of earlier work used is acceptable to the
department and the work is properly referenced. Students wanting to use earlier work
must seek clarification from the relevant department.

5.

Students must ensure they submit the correct and final version of their summative work to
the School. Normally, the department must treat and mark summative work submitted by
the student as a genuine attempt even where a student claims to have submitted the
incorrect version. It will be open to the department to run all submissions through text
matching software (for example Turnitin). For the avoidance of doubt, all work received in
connection with summative assessments is subject to the School’s Assessment Integrity
regulations.

6.

The School’s statement on editorial help for students' written work sets out what the
School considers to be and not to be permissible, by way of editorial help with written
work. Contravention of the statement, whether deliberately or not, is a breach of
assessment integrity.

7.

The following list, although not exhaustive, provides examples of what would be
considered a breach of exam integrity. See Regulation 11.3 for the definition of “exam”
and “script” under these regulations. Any attempt to breach assessment integrity will be
considered a breach in itself:
7.1

accessing, attempting to access, possessing books, notes (regardless of where
they are written), instruments, digital or wearable devices or other materials
however they are stored or transported, which might be used to the student's
advantage and are not expressly allowed by the department under Regulation 9,
into the exam room or using them during an exam where expressly forbidden from
doing so;

7.2

accessing, attempting to access, or possessing a calculator where not
expressly permitted or where calculators are permitted, using a model of
calculator not expressly permitted by the School;

7.3

any writing in the script without the express permission from the invigilator e.g.
writing during “reading time only”, writing before the start of the exam or writing after
the invigilator has announced the exam has finished;

7.4

communication in any form (e.g. face to face, electronically or by other means) by a
student during the exam (or an attempt to do so) to another individual or individuals
except where expressly allowed by the department;

7.5

during an exam, copying or reading (or attempting to do so) from the work of
another student or from another student's books, notes, instruments, computer
files or other materials or aids, unless expressly allowed by the department;

7.6

altering, amending, accessing, submitting or resubmitting exam scripts (or
attempting to do so) other than in accordance with the exam conditions,
Page 2 of 15

including after the exam submission time;

8

9.

7.7

removing or attempting to remove from an exam room any question papers,
scripts (blank or completed) or other materials supplied by the School without
express permission to do so;

7.8

offering or attempting to offer a bribe of any kind to an invigilator, School
professional services staff, examiner or other person connected with an
assessment;

7.9

using, or attempting to use software or information stored electronically in any
form that is not expressly allowed by the department;

7.10

providing or receiving information about the content of an exam before it takes
place (or attempting to do so), except when expressly allowed by the department;
impersonating or trying to impersonate a candidate, or attempting to procure a third
party to impersonate oneself;

7.11

not complying with the reasonable request of an invigilator under these or other
regulations and exam procedures;

7.12

any conduct intended to secure an unfair advantage for the student through
deception or by acting contrary to published rules or regulations;

Other examples of assessment integrity breaches under these regulations could include
but are not limited to:
8.1

“contract cheating” also sometimes known as 'Ghost Writing', or use of 'Essay
Mills', or anything that constitutes commissioning (including buying or paying for)
another person to complete an assignment, or part of an assignment which is then
submitted as the student's own work. Where a student is found to have breached
assessment integrity as a result of contract cheating, they may also be referred to
the School’s Disciplinary Procedure for Students;

8.2

accessing or attempting to access unauthorised material (as defined by the
department) during a “live” take home or online assessment (e.g. an assessment
with a shared start and finish time) which includes the use of third-party websites
which might contain full or partial answers that match LSE assessments;

8.3

falsification of data, e.g. the presentation of any quantitative or qualitative data,
based on work purporting to have been carried out by the student, but which has
been bought or invented by the student or altered, copied or obtained by unfair
means;

8.4

any attempt to solicit answers to an assessment through a third party, which
includes Artificial Intelligence software will be deemed as academic misconduct,
even where such an attempt is unsuccessful and/or where there is no evidence of
the material from such a third party being used in the assessment in question.

Each department will provide instructions to students on the conventions required for the
citation and acknowledgement of sources in its discipline, to what level of communication
during the assessment is permitted, if allowed at all and any other specific rules regarding
an assessment. The department shall state whether the use of Artificial Intelligence
software is permitted and, where permitted, any conditions or limitations on its use. The
department shall also specify items such as books, notes, instruments, computer files or
other materials or aids that are allowed to be used in conjunction with assessment. The
School will confirm which calculators are permissible during an exam. The responsibility
for learning the proper forms of citation, assessment rules and permitted materials
(including permitted calculators) lies with the individual student.
Page 3 of 15

10.

During an exam, or shortly prior to the start, the student must, on request, surrender to the
invigilator any books, notes, instruments, calculators, computer files or other materials or
aids introduced into an exam room that the invigilator reasonably believes are not allowed
under Regulation 9. The invigilator shall pass such articles to the Student Services Centre,
which may make copies of them and may retain the original articles and the copies at its
absolute discretion.

Procedure under these Regulations
11.

In these regulations the following definitions apply:
11.1

The Student Regulations Team will be referred to as the “SRT”;

11.2

“work” means summative work of any kind submitted for assessment or opinion by
staff of the School, including material submitted for upgrade to PhD status;

12.

11.3

“exam” means work undertaken in an invigilated exam room, usually under timed
conditions or an online exam format, where the department will set explicit rules
around whether or not communication with other people is permitted during the
assessment window and what sources/materials may be referred to during the
assessment window (e.g. if it is considered an open or closed book exam).

11.4

“script” means a summative assessment written by hand or using a computer, under
exam conditions;

11.5

""research student" means a student who is either enrolled in an MPhil/PhD
programme, or in the PhD stage of an MRes/PhD programme"

11.6

all allegations relating to MPhil/PhD work should be referred directly to the PhD
Academy. The SRT will refer any allegations it receives relating to MPhil/PhD work
to the PhD Academy. For allegations relating to MPhil/PhD work all actions
described in these regulations as being undertaken by the SRT will be undertaken
by the PhD Academy.

11.7

“department” means academic department, faculty, or institute responsible for the
assessment in which the allegation is being made;

11.8

“examination board” means the body of examiners that initially considers the work of
the student;

11.9

“source” means the published primary and secondary material from any source
whatsoever (including websites and/or online material), and includes information
and opinions gained directly from other people, including students and
teachers/lecturers;

11.10

“year” means the academic session in which a proven breach was committed.

11.11

the Head of the relevant department or institute or their nominated delegate will
be referred to as the “departmental representative.”

These regulations apply to allegations of plagiarism, assessment integrity breach within
an exam room or exam setting or other academic assessment integrity breach by any
student. Allegations of breaching assessment integrity can take place in any work,
though these regulations cover only alleged integrity breaches in summative assessed
work submitted in connection with the requirements for an LSE programme or course.
Allegations of academic misconduct against a student that are outside these regulations,
for example in formative work or work submitted in connection with external publications,
may be considered under the Disciplinary Procedure for Students.
Page 4 of 15

13.

The department responsible for the assessment in question will normally be responsible
for conducting an investigation into any allegations. The department must determine if the
allegation is major or minor and whether it is appropriate to deal with the allegation at a
local level or if it must be referred to an Assessment Integrity Panel. The department may
consult with other representatives from across the School if appropriate when making
such decisions. The student has the right to respond to any allegation and seek impartial
advice from the Students’ Union Advice Team. In all cases the department must consult
the Assessment Integrity guidance before taking any formal action under these
regulations.

14.

The SRT can issue a warning note to a student to caution their behaviour without the need
to refer the matter to the relevant department. Such a warning will only be issued where a
student appears to have breached the rules but has seemingly not done so deliberately
and/or has not gained a material advantage (e.g. not complying with the instructions from
the invigilator). The SRT will flag the issue(s) to the student in order to prevent them from
committing a serious breach of these regulations in any future assessment.

15.

If a student infringes these regulations they will be liable to action under these
regulations or under the Disciplinary Regulations for Students.

16.

All action under these regulations, whether by the student or by the School, should be
conducted promptly.

Investigating a suspected breach of assessment integrity:
17.

Any member of the School (staff or student) or an external examiner may make an
allegation to the Head of the department. Where an examiner intends to make an
allegation, they should consult any co- examiner(s) of the work concerned before
contacting the Head. For exam integrity; students should flag any concerns to an
invigilator, an invigilator or other member of the School should normally make an allegation
in writing as part of their report on the exam concerned. This report should be passed to
the Student Services Centre in the first instance who will ensure any allegation is passed
to the relevant department. If a department identifies an allegation of an exam integrity
breach when marking a script they should follow and apply the Assessment Integrity
guidance.

18.

The Head may delegate to a senior member of the department any actions and decisions
within this part of the regulations. The representative cannot be the student’s Academic
Mentor, supervisor or have had any previous involvement with the student outside of the
anonymous marking procedure.

19.

The departmental representative may consult an external examiner. For allegations
relating to MPhil/PhD work the external examiner must not have previously examined the
work. The departmental representative will also seek such evidence and advice as they
may think necessary, which may include interviewing the student(s) concerned. Where
practicable, such interviews should be conducted in the presence of an officer of the
Students' Union Advice Service. Where the allegation relates to exam misconduct, a
witness may also be invited to attend if deemed appropriate. The department will keep a
formal record of the interview which may be referred to by a Panel if one is convened.

20.

On the basis of the evidence and any advice collected under Regulation 19, the
departmental representative will determine whether there is sufficient cause for the
student to be required to answer a formal allegation.

21.

Where the departmental representative determines there is no case to answer they may
dismiss the allegation, in which case no further reference will be made to it and no
information about it will be added to the student's file. It is open to the representative to
caution the student if deemed appropriate (e.g. to ensure they have carefully read and
Page 5 of 15

understood the School and departmental assessment rules when submitting future work).
22.

Where the departmental representative determines there is a case to answer, they must
also determine whether it is a minor or major allegation. The Assessment Integrity
guidance sets out factors relevant to the seriousness of different types of breach and the
range of penalties that are likely to be proportionate in each case. Allegations will
normally be treated as minor where the guidance indicates that a proportionate penalty
can be applied by the department. Allegations will normally be treated as major where the
guidance indicates that a proportionate penalty may require consideration by an
Assessment Integrity Panel.

23.

Before proceeding under any of the regulations set out at 25 to 30 the department must
follow and apply the School’s published Assessment Integrity guidance on investigating
alleged breaches of assessment integrity before deciding whether it is a major or minor
case. Where it is determined the case is minor, the department must also follow and
apply this guidance when proposing a penalty to a student, and again when applying the
final penalty.

24.

The department must report the details of the allegation and outcome to the Student
Regulations Team or PhD Academy for research students, once a case has been
resolved. The process for doing this will be set out in the guidance.

Dealing with minor allegation(s)
25.

Where the department representative determines the allegation is minor it can be dealt
with at a local level.
25.1

The department must determine whether to deal with the matter as an
Acknowledgment of a Breach or apply a penalty.

25.2

The department should not come to a decision about what penalty to apply,
although a proposed penalty may be presented with the allegation, until all of the
evidence has been established and the student has had the opportunity to
consider any appropriate evidence and respond to the allegation.

26.

Before proceeding under these regulations the department should take appropriate steps
to check whether or not the student has a declared disability and/or any adjustments.
Where this is the case the department must check with the Disability and Mental Health
Service to determine if there are any appropriate adjustments that must be applied before
taking any action under regulations 25 to 30 (e.g. allow the student to request extra time
to consider and respond to the allegation).

27.

The departmental representative (subject to ratification by the relevant Sub-Board Chair,
who may consult with other Sub-Board members), or the Doctoral Programme Director in
the case of research students, may take one of the following actions listed below:

Acknowledgment of a Breach
27.1

If, in the opinion of the departmental representative, the nature of the formal
allegation is such that if proved it would result in no, or a very small, amendment to
the decision of the examination board for undergraduate or taught graduate
students and there is no other justification for further time being spent on the
allegation, then they may invite the student to consent to an Acknowledgment
of a Breach.

27.2

The departmental representative should present the offer of an Acknowledgment of
a Breach formally and in writing to the student. The allegation should be fully
explained, specifying the parts of any work thought to be affected and in the case of
plagiarism including the suspected sources and any related evidence which will
Page 6 of 15

normally include reports generated by text matching software. The student must be
given a time limit of not less than five working days to either accept or decline the
Acknowledgment of a Breach.
27.3

Where the student chooses to accept this offer they must do so formally and in
writing. A note will then be placed on their central file held by the Student Services
Centre identifying that the integrity breach was alleged and considered. The
Academic Mentor or Supervisor may counsel the student as to their future
behaviour. The examination board for undergraduate or taught graduate students
will be informed of the decision; if the student's overall mark profile is borderline and
they have submitted exceptional circumstances, the board will be entitled to take
the allegation into account when deciding whether or not to apply the normal
application of the classification scheme.

27.4

Normally the affected work should have already been marked and that mark should
be submitted to Student Services in the normal way. Where a mark has not yet
been agreed, a mark should be determined by excluding any plagiarised material or
unauthorised content and assigning a mark only to the non-plagiarised/authorised
material. A department will normally use text matching software to determine the
plagiarised material to be excluded. A similar approach may be used for a breach of
exam integrity, with the examiners excluding any material in the submission that
has been identified from unauthorised material used during the exam or
unauthorised work that is identified under Regulation 7 above). Once marked by
internal examiners the external examiner must be consulted. For the avoidance of
doubt, where the work has not yet been marked the student must be informed of the
way in which the work will be marked and accept the offer of an Acknowledgment of
a Breach before a mark is returned.

27.5

If the student does not so consent, the allegation will be considered by an
Assessment Integrity Panel.

Presenting an allegation and proposed penalty
28.

The departmental representative should present the allegation formally and in writing to
the student, specifying the parts of any work thought to be affected and where practicable
including the suspected sources and any related examples, or relevant excerpts from an
invigilator report.
28.1

The departmental representative should include an explanation for why the matter
is being treated as minor, and why the penalty that is being proposed is deemed
appropriate.

28.2

The departmental representative must provide the student with the opportunity to
simply accept the penalty, in which case this process can be concluded as per
Regulation 30 or to provide a written statement in response to the allegation,
giving a time limit of not less than ten working days for them to respond, and

28.3

The departmental representative should advise the student they can seek advice
from the Students' Union Advice Service and optionally from their Academic Mentor
if they are not directly involved in the allegation or (if a research student), from the
Supervisor or Doctoral Programme Director.

28.4

Where a statement is received from the student the department must consider all of
the evidence, the student’s explanation and any exceptional circumstances
(provided there is appropriate corroborating evidence) provided by the student. It
should also consider whether the level of support and information the School and
department has provided about the assessment rules was accurate and appropriate.
The department must then determine whether to:
dismiss the allegation; or,
Page 7 of 15

uphold the allegation and apply the proposed penalty; or,
uphold the allegation and apply a lesser penalty; or,
decide the case is more serious than first thought and refer it to a Panel
28.5

Where the department determines there is no case to answer they may dismiss the
allegation, in which case no further reference will be made to it and no information
about it will be added to the student's file.

28.6

Where the department determines a penalty must be applied, it must follow and apply
the relevant Assessment Integrity guidance to determine the most appropriate
penalty to apply listed under the Penalties section below; either to confirm the
provisional penalty or apply a less severe penalty. Each penalty will be subject to the
further application of the degree regulations and relevant General Academic
Regulations.

Penalties for minor assessment integrity breaches
29.

The following penalties may be applied by the department:
29.1

(For all students taking taught courses) That a new mark be determined for the work
by excluding the unauthorised content/plagiarised material and assigning marks
only to the non-plagiarised/authorised material in accordance with normal
assessment criteria. A department will normally use text matching software and/or
their academic judgement to determine the plagiarised material to be excluded.
Once marked by internal examiners the external examiner should normally be
consulted. An agreed mark should be released to the student within an appropriate
timescale; or,

29.2

(For all students taking taught courses) That the student’s be deducted either five,
ten or fifteen marks from the assessment in question; or,

29.3

(For all students taking taught courses) That the student’s mark in the assessment
in question is capped at the pass mark of 40 for undergraduate students or 50 for
taught graduate students; or,

29.4

(For all students taking taught courses) That the student’s overall mark and grade in
the course in which the assessment takes place, be capped at the relevant Pass
mark; or,

29.5

(For all students taking taught courses) That the student be required to replace the
assessment in question with a new submission (without using a further attempt
opportunity) that will be capped at the pass mark of 40 for undergraduate students
or 50 for taught graduate students; or,

29.6

(For all students taking taught courses) That the student be awarded a zero mark
for the assessed work only, which can include an assessment worth up to 100% of
a half or full unit course. The student will have the right to re-submit the work
provided they have not run out of attempts to do so and only where this penalty (or
their other marks) results in them not being awarded the degree.

29.7

(For research students only) Where an assessment integrity breach has
occurred in material submitted for progress review, the progress review panel
will determine the outcome of the progress review on the basis of the nonplagiarised material."

29.8

(For research students only) Where a minor assessment integrity breach has
occurred in material submitted for upgrade, the student can either revise the
work and resubmit for a second attempt at the upgrade (where a second attempt
remains), or where the second attempt has already been taken, the Upgrade
Page 8 of 15

Panel should determine on the basis of the non-plagiarised material whether or
not the student can be upgraded in accordance with the School’s regulations.
29.9

(For research students only) Where a minor assessment integrity breach has
occurred in the final thesis, the examiners should be made aware of the
plagiarised material within the thesis, but the student can be examined in
accordance with the School’s regulations.

Confirming the penalty to be applied
30.

The departmental representative must present to the student in writing the penalty to be
applied, provide an explanation for this decision and advise them that they may seek
impartial advice from the Students’ Union Advice Service. The student must be offered
the opportunity to either accept the penalty or to request that this matter proceed to an
Assessment Integrity Panel which will consider the matter afresh. The student must be
allowed at least five working days to respond. The student should be informed that an
Assessment Integrity Panel has the authority to dismiss an allegation but that it may
apply the same penalties available to the department or more severe sanctions as set out
under Regulation 53. The student’s results cannot be released until the matter is
resolved. Therefore, the department should act swiftly to prevent any possible delay to
progression or an award where practically possible.
30.1

If the student formally accepts the penalty in writing, a note will be placed on their
central file held by the Student Services Centre identifying the allegation, outcome
and that the matter was resolved under these regulations. Where the student does
not respond by the deadline, they may be provided one further opportunity to
respond or explain why they need more time. If they do not respond after this, the
proposed penalty will automatically be applied

30.2

Where a student does not respond within the deadline, it will be open to them to
appeal against the penalty up to one calendar month after the department have
informed them of this decision. The appeal can only be made on the basis that the
student believes they can present a good reason and evidence to show they were
unable to engage with the department at the time. In order to appeal the student
must email the Student Regulations Team via ssc.plagiarism@lse.ac.uk within one
calendar month of the department’s last correspondence confirming the penalty.
The student should clearly explain why they were unable to engage and provide
contemporaneous supporting evidence. The Head of the Student Regulations Team
or their delegated representative will determine whether or not the appeal is valid.
Where it is valid the student will be permitted to formally respond to the allegation
and proposed penalty. Where it is determined the appeal is not valid the penalty will
stand and this is the end of the matter.

30.3

Where a student requests the allegation to be considered by an Assessment
Integrity Panel, the department representative will follow the instructions at
Regulation 31. Whilst every effort will be made to arrange a Panel as soon as
possible, it is likely that opting for a Panel hearing will delay graduation, prevent a
student from utilising an in-year resit period and/or could possibly delay progression.

Dealing with major allegations
31.

Subject to Regulation 40, all major allegations must be considered by an Assessment
Integrity Panel. The student will have the right to be presented with the allegation and
formally respond in writing before the Panel convenes and at the Panel meeting itself.
At least one departmental representative must attend this meeting to present the
allegation to the Panel.
31.1

Before an allegation can be considered by a Panel the departmental representative
must present the allegation formally and in writing to the student, specifying the
parts of any work thought to be affected and where practicable including the
Page 9 of 15

suspected sources and any related examples and evidence which may include an
invigilator report or reports generated by text matching software. The departmental
representative should advise the student that a member of the SRT will contact
them separately to inform them about the procedure.

32.

31.2

The departmental representative must pass a copy of all of the case papers to the
SRT. The SRT will request a statement from the student and advise them of the
procedure.

31.3

All students presented with a major allegation will have their results withheld until
the allegation has been formally concluded under these regulations. This may
mean the student will not be permitted to attend the graduation ceremony if this
matter has not been fully concluded when the ceremony takes place.

Regulation 40 sets out the basis on which a major allegation may be considered by the
Panel Chair or for MPhil/PhD level cases the Chair of the Research Degrees SubCommittee, as appropriate, without the need to convene a full Panel.

The Assessment Integrity Panel
33.

An Assessment Integrity Panel will normally comprise three members. The Assessment
Integrity Panel Chair or for MPhil/PhD level cases the Chair of the Research Degrees
Sub-Committee, as appropriate, will normally chair the Panel unless excluded from
membership because of previous connection with the assessment in question or with the
allegation, in which case a deputy Chair will chair it. Two academic members from the
Undergraduate Studies Sub-Committee (USSC) and/or the Graduate Studies and/or a
sabbatical officer of the Students' Union will also serve on the Panel as members.
33.1

34.

35.

No person directly involved with the assessment in question or connected in any
way with the allegation, investigation or the student will serve as a member when
the Panel considers a case. This means a member belonging to the same faculty of
the student or assessment in question will normally be excluded from being on the
Panel. A member of the SRT will act as secretary to the Panel. All relevant
documentation will be placed before the Panel.

The role of the Panel is:
34.1

to decide whether the allegation(s) as determined by regulations 1-7 above, has
been proved to the satisfaction of a majority of Panel members, on the balance of
the evidence presented to them, and

34.2

where the allegation is found proved, to apply a penalty from the list set out at
Regulation 27, 29 or 53.

All three Panel members including a designated Chair must be in attendance to
ensure the meeting is quorate.

Preparation for an Assessment Integrity Panel hearing
36.

Any actions that might involve informing the student of the allegation, will normally be
delayed if the student is undergoing assessments during any of the School’s main
assessment periods. In such cases the allegation will normally be delayed until after their
last assessment in this period. This Regulation does not exclude the possibility of
interviewing a student at this time or treating this matter as an Acknowledgment of a
Breach.
36.1

A student may be notified of the allegation within this time frame if it is deemed to
be in their best interests to know about the allegation (e.g. to prevent them from
committing any further possible misconduct in their future work). The Panel hearing
Page 10 of 15

itself will normally be held in abeyance until after the exam or essay has been
submitted. The student retains the right to request the Panel meeting as soon as
possible.
37.

The secretary to the Panel will:
37.1

send the student a copy of the allegation and any relevant documents that provide
evidence in support of it, a copy of these procedures and a proposed timetable for
progressing the matter, and

37.2

invite the student to state whether the allegation is true or false and to provide a
statement and/or any evidence or information about their circumstances relevant to
the case, giving a time limit of not less than ten working days for them to respond,
and

37.3

advise the student to seek advice from the Students' Union Advice Team and
optionally from their Academic Mentor if they are not directly involved in the
allegation or, if a research student, from the Supervisor or Doctoral Programme
Director.

The secretary to the Panel will pass the student's submissions to the departmental representative
who may provide a written response within five working days for consideration by the Panel.
38.

All submissions received within the time frames set out above will be made available to the
Panel.

39.

A meeting of the Panel will normally be called to consider the allegation. Exceptionally,
the secretary may determine that a matter is suitable for consideration by Chair's Action
rather than by a Panel, having regard to the circumstances of the case and any relevant
guidance.
39.1 In determining whether a matter is suitable for consideration by Chair's Action, the
secretary may take into account factors including, but not limited to:
(a) whether the student has accepted the allegation and all material
evidence relied upon by the department;
(b) whether there are any material facts in dispute;
(c) whether the student has agreed that the matter may be determined
without a hearing;
(d) whether participation in a hearing would be detrimental to the student's
health or wellbeing, having regard to any supporting evidence;
(e) whether, in the secretary's judgement, a hearing would assist in the fair
and proper determination of the matter.
39.2 A student shall have no entitlement to have a matter determined by Chair's Action.

40.

Where the student agrees to determination by Chair’s Action, the Chair may determine the
case without convening a Panel and may impose any penalty that would have been
available to the Panel at Regulation 27, 29 and 53, except for expulsion.
40.1
Where a case is determined by Chair’s Action, the Chair shall consider the evidence
provided by the department, the student’s response, and any relevant mitigating or
aggravating factors.
40.2
The Chair must apply the Assessment Integrity Guidance when determining the
appropriate penalty and must be satisfied that the penalty is proportionate.
40.3
At the time they are informed of the Chair’s Action decision, the student will also be
informed of their right to appeal this decision in accordance with the appeal
procedure set out at Regulation 57.

41.

Where a case is proceeding for consideration by a Panel the secretary to the Panel will:
41.1

inform the student of the date on which the hearing is to take place at least five
working days beforehand (though the student is entitled to waive this period of
Page 11 of 15

notice), of the membership of the Panel, the department representative(s) who will
attend and of any witnesses who will attend, and of their right to call witnesses;
41.2

provide the student with a copy of any response received under Regulation 38 and
any other material that the Panel will consider;

41.3

invite the student to attend the hearing of the allegation and to make
representations, present evidence and question any witnesses;

41.4

inform the student that they may be accompanied or represented according to the
conditions set out in Regulation 44; and

41.5

inform the student that they may submit additional written submissions and other
forms of evidence to the Panel as long as these are received by the secretary at
least two working days before the Panel hearing. Evidence submitted later will only
be considered by agreement of the Panel Chair.

41.6

The meeting may take place in person, virtually or by hybrid. The Panel recognises
that students may not be located in the UK at the time of the hearing and it will not
draw any inferences if a student cannot participate in person.

Assessment Integrity Panel hearings
42.

The departmental representative is normally responsible for attending the hearing and
presenting the case against the student. They will have the right to submit documents and
other forms of evidence to the Panel (subject to the timeframe and terms set out in
Regulation 42), to see or to listen to, as appropriate, all evidence given, to question the
student and other witnesses appearing before the Panel, and to challenge evidence
submitted by the student.

43.

The student may be accompanied by a representative. This should normally be an officer
of the Students' Union Advice Team. If not a member of the Students’ Union Advice Team,
the student must inform the secretary to the Panel of the background and professional
qualifications of the representative at least five working days before the date set for the
hearing. The student is expected to answer questions directly. The representative may
speak only to clarify something the student may have said or to ask a question/clarification
if they think the student has not understood a question.

44.

Where the student has indicated that they will be accompanied by a legal representative
the School reserves the right to recruit a legal representative to assist with the case.

45.

If the student has a declared disability with the School then they may be entitled to
adjustments (e.g. rest breaks during the Panel meeting). It is the student’s responsibility to
request adjustments at least five working days in advance of the hearing if they think they
are eligible. The secretary will discuss all requests with the Disability and Wellbeing
Service.

46.

The student will have the right to submit documents and other forms of evidence to the
Panel (subject to Regulation 42), to see or to listen to, as appropriate, all evidence given,
to question the person presenting the case and other witnesses appearing before the
Panel, and to challenge evidence. The student's friend or representative may attend the
meeting to accompany the student, but the student is expected to respond to the allegation
directly in the first instance.

47.

In exceptional circumstances, the Panel may adjourn the hearing to seek other evidence to
help it in reaching its decision. Independent expert evidence may be obtained and
introduced by either party, as long as it is received by the secretary at least five working
days before the Panel reconvenes. Any evidence requested by the Panel will be disclosed
to the student and their representative as well as the departmental representative, who will
each be given the opportunity to comment upon it. Where a hearing has reconvened, its
Page 12 of 15

membership will be as originally appointed; no replacements will be allowed except in
exceptional circumstances.
48.

Any person who attended the initial hearing is entitled to attend the reconvened hearing.
The student and the departmental representative are also entitled to serve further
evidence and/or written submissions in response to any new evidence to be considered by
the Panel, as long as these are received by the secretary at least two working days before
the re-start of the hearing.

49.

The validity of the proceedings of the Panel will not be affected by the unwillingness of the
student, or other person acting with or for them, to reply to questions, orally or in writing, or
to appear before the Panel.

50.

49.1

Before considering an allegation in the absence of the student, the Panel must
satisfy itself that the secretary to the Panel has fulfilled regulations 37 to 41 and
that the student has had a reasonable opportunity to respond. Where the Panel
concludes that the student is unwilling to reply to a question or questions, it may
draw reasonable inferences from that refusal.

49.2

If the student cannot attend because of a disability, they must inform the secretary
straight away. The secretary may be able to arrange adjustments in accordance
with Regulation 46.

The Panel may meet in private, with its secretary in attendance, when it wishes, provided
that in such meetings it does not hear evidence. When all evidence has been heard the
Panel will meet in private, with its secretary in attendance, to make its decision. The Panel
will then determine what penalty listed at either Regulation 27, 29 or 53 it is appropriate to
apply. The Panel may seek advice from the secretary regarding the School regulations,
procedures and case precedent.

The Assessment Integrity Panel's decision and subsequent action
51.

52.

Having conducted the hearing:
51.1

if the Panel decides that the allegation has not been proved, it will direct that no
further action be taken, and no record of the allegation or the proceedings be
included on the student's record. It is open to the Panel to refer the student to their
Academic Mentor to ensure they do not make the same mistakes in future work.
The secretary will confirm the decision to dismiss the allegation and any informal
caution in writing;

51.2

if the Panel decides that an assessment integrity breach has been committed by
the student, it will apply one of the penalties listed at Regulation 27, 29 or 53, with
a formal admonition to the student and a note being placed on their record. In
doing so, it will seek to reflect the seriousness of the breach and may take into
account any previous breaches committed by the student. In reaching its decision
the Panel will be mindful of the need of the School to assure the highest standards
among its students.

The penalties available to the Panel are any of those listed at Regulation 27, 29 or as set
out below:
52.1

(for all students taking taught courses) that, despite the allegation being upheld, a
mark be returned for the work in question. A new mark should be determined
according to Regulation 29.1, or

52.2

(For research students only) where the assessment integrity breach has occurred in
work submitted for an upgrade, the Upgrade Panel should determine whether or not
the student should be upgraded in accordance with the School’s regulations, or
Page 13 of 15

52.3

(For research students only) where the assessment integrity breach has occurred
in a final thesis, the examiners will examine the student in accordance with the
School’s regulations, or

52.4

(For all students taking taught courses) that the student be awarded a zero mark,
either for the assessed work or for the course as a whole. The student will have the
right to re-submit the work at the next available opportunity provided they have not
run out of attempts to do so and only where this penalty (or their other marks)
results in them not being awarded the degree, or (for research students only)
results in them not being allowed to progress or be upgraded. Or

52.5

(For all students taking taught courses) that the student be awarded a zero mark for
the work or course as a whole and in addition, a zero mark for one or more other
pieces of assessed work or whole courses taken that year. The Panel will use its
academic judgement to determine which other work and/or courses should be
penalised. The student will have the right to re-submit the work or courses at the
next available opportunity provided they have not run out of attempts to do so and
only where this penalty (or their other marks) results in them not being awarded the
degree, or (for research students only) results in them not being allowed to
progress or be upgraded. Or

52.6

(For all students taking taught courses) except where it may result in a taught
graduate student receiving a Bad Fail mark, they be awarded a zero mark either for
the assessed work or for the course as a whole and be denied the right to re-sit it or
an equivalent course;

52.7

(For all students taking taught courses) that the student be awarded a zero mark for
all courses taken that year, or for all courses taken that year and all previous years,
and also be expelled from the School, or

52.8

(For all students taking taught courses) that the student’s overall award
classification shall drop one class. This penalty will be applied at the point the
overall award classification is known. The classification will remain unchanged in the
event the student can only achieve a Pass degree on the basis of their non
penalised results. This penalty can be applied in its own right or in addition to the
penalties listed above.

52.9

(PhD students only) that the student only be examined for an MPhil award in
accordance with the School’s regulations.

52.10

(For research students only) that the student not be awarded any degree, and that
they be denied the right of resubmission or right of appeal under these regulations,
and that they also be expelled from the School.

53.

Any penalty applied by the Panel will be subject to the further application of the relevant
classification scheme and relevant General Academic Regulations.

54.

If suspicion of an assessment integrity breach is discovered after graduation, the
student will be subject to the procedure set out in these regulations which, if a breach
is confirmed could result in the overall degree classification being lowered or the
award being revoked.

55.

Where practicable the decisions of the Panel will be given to the student orally by the
Chair of the Panel and will be conveyed to the student in writing by the secretary to the
Panel. The secretary to the Panel will also send the student a formal record of the hearing.

56.

Where a Panel has decided that a student has breached these regulations, the student will
have the right to appeal against that decision on one or more of the following grounds:
Page 14 of 15

57.

56.1

that the Panel was constituted in such a way that it was not impartial.

56.2

that there has been a material breach of these procedures that affected the fairness
of the Panel's decision.

56.3

that relevant fresh evidence has been received that might have caused a different
decision to have been made, provided the student can demonstrate that there
was a valid reason why the evidence was not presented to the Panel before its
decision.

56.4

Any such appeal must be received by the secretary within ten working days of the
date of the written confirmation of the Panel’s decision sent under Regulation 56.

A Pro-Director or their delegated representative will have the sole right of determining
whether the student has presented sufficient grounds to warrant reopening the hearing. It
will be open to a Pro-Director considering an appeal to consult the Panel Chair who heard
the case in question. It will be open to the Pro Director (or representative) either:
57.1

to change the penalty decided by the Panel to one which in their opinion is less
serious, or to direct a rehearing by a different Panel, or

57.2

to reject the appeal on the basis that the student has not presented sufficient
grounds to warrant reopening the hearing, which can include dismissing the
submission of new evidence.

58.

If the student does not appeal, they will receive final confirmation of the penalty and an
explanation about its impact on their status with the School from the secretary.

59.

The consideration and conclusion of an appeal against the decision of a Panel under
these Regulations will complete the procedures open to the student within the School. The
appeal outcome will be confirmed in writing in a completion of procedures letter issued on
behalf of the Academic Registrar. This letter will inform the student of their right to make a
complaint to the Office of the Independent Adjudicator for Higher Education.

60.

Upon the conclusion of a misconduct case the student’s results will be released, subject to
ratification from the relevant examination boards and subject to any outstanding debts to
the School.

See the Calendar for further information about Programme Regulations, Course Guides, School
and academic Regulations.

Page 15 of 15
