Skip to Main Content

Generative AI for students

Provides an overview of uses, tools and issues with generative artificial intelligence

-

Home

-

Generative AI at MQ

-

Using generative AI responsibly & ethically

-

Choosing generative AI tools

-

Prompting

-

Evaluating results

-

Use AI for smarter learning

-

Referencing & acknowledging generative AI
This link opens in a new window

-

MultiSearch Research Assistant

-

Using AI-powered tools for literature reviews
This link opens in a new window

-

More resources from Waranara Library

About this guide

Generative AI is all around us! It's changing the way we study and work.

This guide will

- outline some key terms and concepts around AI.

- explain how generative AI is being used at MQ, and tools you can access.

- suggest ways to learn and work more effectively with AI.

Diagram adapted from image by: Phil Laufenberg, Head of AI, Macquarie University, September 2024

-

AI vs Generative AI: What's the difference?

-

More key terms

-

Go futher

AI, or Artificial Intelligence refers to a broad field of computer science focused on creating systems that can perform tasks that normally require human intelligence.

Generative AI refers to a type of artificial intelligence that can create new content—such as text, images, audio, video, or even code—based on patterns it has learned from existing data and the prompts you enter.

Aspect

AI (Artificial Intelligence)

Generative AI

Definition

Broad field of systems that mimic human intelligence

Subset of AI focused on creating new content

Primary Goal

Analyse, predict, classify, and make decisions

Generate original outputs (text, images, audio, etc.)

Examples

Spam filters, recommendation engines, speech recognition

ChatGPT, DALL&middot;E, Midjourney, music generators

Techniques Used

Machine Learning, Deep Learning, Rule-based systems

Large Language Models (LLMs), GANs, Diffusion Models

Output Type

Predictions, classifications, decisions

Creative content (articles, art, code, videos)

Use Cases

Fraud detection, search engines, self-driving cars

Content creation, design, conversational agents

In short:

- AI = Any system that mimics human intelligence (decision-making, prediction, recognition).

- Generative AI = AI that creates new content, not just analyses existing data.

-

AI vs. Generative AI: The Differences Explained This link opens in a new window

Term

Definition

Agent

Pre-configured sets of instructions created by users or platforms that guide an AI tool. By doing this upfront work, agents make AI interactions more predictable, consistent, and aligned with a specific goal.

Artificial Intelligence (AI)

Computer systems programmed to perform specific tasks, such as making predictions based on learned rules. Traditional AI tools perform tasks like searching the internet, playing chess, and recommending purchases.

Generative Artificial Intelligence

A type of AI used to create new content based on patterns in training data. Generative AI tools can write text, create images, music, videos, computer code, and more.

Hallucinations

AI outputs are based on predictions, which can sometimes result in false or nonsensical information. AI cannot distinguish fact from fiction, so all outputs should be verified before acceptance.

Large Language Models (LLMs)

AI systems that generate text by identifying patterns in existing data and producing words that are likely to occur together.

Natural Language Processing (NLP)

Computational techniques used to interpret and manipulate natural human language. LLMs rely on NLP for text generation and understanding.

Prompts and Outputs
A prompt is an instruction that you give a generative AI tool, which then produces an output (completion). Writing effective prompts (sometimes called prompt engineering) is a skill that requires practice (and a few strategies) in order for you to get the best results from the tool.

For a more extensive explanation of key terms, visit:

-

CSIRO AI glossary This link opens in a new window

-

Generative Artificial Intelligence This link opens in a new window

This Wikipedia article provides a good summary of the history, uses and tools.

Watch:

The explainer video below uses straightforward explanations. Check out the IBM channel for other videos on AI, regularly updated.

-
Last Updated: Sep 25, 2026 3:49 PM

-
URL: https://libguides.mq.edu.au/generativeai

-
Print Page

Login to LibApps

Subjects:

- AI & How-To Guides

Tags:

- academic integrity
- choosing
- developing prompts
- evaluating
- EVERY test
- generative AI for students
- generative artificial intelligence
- prompt engineering
- referencing
- selecting
