The University of Manchester
Academic Malpractice Procedure 1
Content
1. Introduction
2. Academic integrity
3. Definitions:
3.1 Academic malpractice
3.2 Poor academic practice
3.3 Misconduct in research
4. Detection:
4.1 General
4.2 Written assignments
4.3 Examination malpractice
4.4 Contract cheating
5. Case handling
6. Document control

1. Introduction
1.1. Paragraph 2(r) of Regulation XVII (Conduct and Discipline of Students) (the “Regulation”)
defines academic malpractice as a type of misconduct which can be subject to the
University’s disciplinary processes.

2. Academic integrity 2
2.1. Academic integrity means honesty and responsibility in scholarship. Assessments exist to
help students learn; grades exist to show how fully this goal is attained. Therefore all work
and all grades should result from a student's own understanding and effort. Academic
integrity involves values such as avoidance of cheating or plagiarism; maintenance of
academic standards; honesty and rigor in research and academic publishing.
2.2. It is the responsibility of the University and its constituent parts to ensure that all students
understand the academic requirements expected of them. As a minimum students should
be made aware of academic integrity and academic malpractice through handbooks and
online resources. In particular this Procedure should be available to students. These
responsibilities should be balanced against those of the students who must clearly indicate
any lack of understanding concerning academic malpractice and must engage with the
resources made available on this subject.
2.3. It is good practice for academic integrity to be highlighted to students throughout their
programme and for students to be given the opportunity to think critically, to reflect, construct
and revise arguments and to proof-read.
2.4. In relation to the use of Generative Artificial Intelligence (AI), some general uses of AI may
permissible (such as for spellcheck and revision) but, in relation to more specific uses,
students must ensure that this does not contravene the definitions of academic malpractice
set out below. Programmes can identify further boundaries or allowances of AI usage based
on their assessment needs but must make these clear to students. The University’s
1

Any reference in this Procedure to a named officer should also be read as a reference to their delegated nominee.
Academic Integrity is referred to in this Procedure within the context of academic malpractice. The concept of
Academic Integrity is much broader.

2

1

overarching position on AI is set out in the Guidelines for Staff and Students Using or
Developing AI.
2.5. The University can minimise the opportunity for academic malpractice by:
2.5.1. Providing the information contained within this Procedure.
2.5.2. Varying assessment tasks, topics and questions from year to year.
2.5.3. Using forms of assessment that require demonstration of the understanding of
knowledge rather than straightforward repetition of such knowledge.
2.5.4. Providing feedback in accordance with the Policy on Feedback to Undergraduate and
Postgraduate Taught Students, or for Postgraduate Research Students, the PGR Code
of Practice.
2.5.5. Passing written work through Turnitin (the University’s similarity detection software),
where it is available, or equivalent software identified by the University which is designed
to assist in detecting academic malpractice.
2.5.6. Providing clear information on the expectations of work, assessment criteria and the
assessment process.
2.5.7. Giving students the opportunity to engage with academic supervision where this is
available for their level of study and assessment.
2.5.8. Anticipate that malpractice may occur when setting assessment conditions.
2.6. Study skills support should be available to students in their academic School. Support also
exists within other areas of the University, such as through the Library’s My Learning
Essentials. My Learning Essentials includes courses on academic integrity, plagiarism,
referencing, planning work, revision, note taking, amongst others.
2.7. Students must not commit academic malpractice in their work. To avoid this, students are
expected:
2.7.1. To produce and submit their own, original, work.
2.7.2. To ensure they manage and allocate their time effectively, from attending lectures
and seminars, to work, reading and research outside their timetabled contact time.
2.7.3. To complete any work, reading and research identified by their Programme.
2.7.4. To familiarise themselves with the concepts of academic integrity and academic
malpractice, read this Procedure and the Guidance for students on plagiarism and other
forms of academic malpractice and engage with the study skills resources provided
through their School and by the University.
2.7.5. To ensure they read and understand the instructions for any assessments and turn
up to assessments on time to hear announcements.
2.7.6. To reflect on any feedback they are given on work and use this to inform their
approach to future work.
2.7.7. To raise, in a timely manner, any assessment or study queries they may have,
through Professional Service or academic colleagues in their School or Faculty, and
alert the School or Faculty to personal circumstances that may be affecting their studies,
2

such as through mitigating circumstances (for taught students) or the Change of
Circumstances (for research students).

3. Definitions
3.1. Academic malpractice
3.1.1. Academic malpractice is any attempt (intentional or otherwise) to gain, or assist
others to gain, an unfair academic advantage in academic work or research. It includes
plagiarism, collusion, fabrication or falsification of results, examination malpractice,
contract cheating and anything else that could result in unearned or undeserved credit
for those committing it. Academic malpractice can result from a deliberate act of
cheating or may be committed unintentionally. Whether intended or not, all incidents of
academic malpractice will be treated seriously by the University.
3.1.2. Types of academic malpractice include:
3.1.2.1.
Plagiarism: The act of using ideas, words, or creations from either humans or
digital systems, such as Generative Artificial intelligence, without proper attribution
or permission and presenting them, either intentionally or unwittingly, as one’s own
work. Plagiarism encompasses a range of practices beyond just verbatim (word
for word) copying. It also includes instances of close paraphrasing, minimal
adaptation, and other actions that involve reproducing the work of another source
in a way that means the assessed work lacks appropriate originality or proper
referencing.
3.1.2.2.
Self-plagiarism: re-using work that has previously submitted for a different
assessment, either at The University of Manchester or a different institution,
without appropriate citation. It is considered to be plagiarism because it
misrepresents the novelty of the current work. Where a student uses a previous
piece of work or publication in a future piece of work, they should ensure that they
properly reference themself and the extent of such use should not be excessive.
3.1.2.3.
Collusion: when a student or students permit or condone another student or
students, to share a piece of work subject to assessment in order to gain a mark
or grade to which they are not entitled. Students who allow another student to
copy their work are also committing collusion and both the copier and the provider
of the work are liable to be penalised. The methods of collusion may include, but
are not limited to, sharing of work, ideas or plans by social media or other electronic
communication means, and/or physical sharing of work, ideas or plans. Collusion
may happen through an exchange or communication outside of an assessment
submission and/or at the time of an assessment submission.
3.1.2.3.1.
The University does, however, allow collaboration where students
work in groups as part of their programme of research or in the preparation
of projects and similar assessments. The person setting the work should
make the expectations and the criteria by which the work will be marked clear.
This may include reference to intended learning outcomes, the rubric and
how marks will be allocated to individual contributing members of a group.
Students should ensure that they are able to identify their contribution to the
piece of work in group submissions. If malpractice appears in a group piece
of work, then the group will normally be expected to take collective
responsibility for the work and be seen as part of the same disciplinary
hearing, unless individual members are able to (i) identify who contributed
the element containing malpractice and/or (ii) distinguish their contribution to
that of the other members of the group.
3

3.1.2.4.
Fabrication or falsification of results, figures or data: the presentation or
inclusion in a piece of work, by individual students or groups of students, of figures
or any data (quantitative or qualitative) which have been made up or altered and
which have no basis in verifiable sources; this may or may not involve other
instances of academic malpractice.
3.1.2.5.
Examination malpractice: when a student, during an examination,
intentionally or unwittingly contravenes set exam conditions, such as by using or
possessing unauthorised materials, software or devices, sharing (including
electronically) exam questions, answers or related information (e.g. discussions)
with others, and sitting or allowing someone to sit an examination in place of the
student supposed to be taking the examination (this list should not be considered
to be exhaustive). The student need not have gained a benefit from the
malpractice nor does the input need to be pertinent for this definition to be met.
This definition applies to all forms of exams including ‘in-person’ exams (e.g. based
in an ‘exam hall’) and/or online exams.
3.1.2.6.
Contract cheating: the commissioning of a piece of work by a third party,
beyond basic proofreading. This may be where a student engages an essay mill
or individual to request that they produce a piece of assessed work, in full or in
part, for the student. This may also include the use of crowdsourcing, where a
student obtains content from, or allows editing by, others and fails to acknowledge
the contribution. Contract cheating may most often be associated with summative
and/or coursework assessments, but may also be found in online examinations. .
3.1.3. Indicators of types of academic malpractice may include (but are not limited to) the
following:
3.1.3.1.
A significant block or numerous blocks of material or copied text expressing
ideas or concepts taken from the work of others, such as books, websites, lectures
slides, without appropriate acknowledgement or citation. This can include material
which is:
3.1.3.1.1.
not appropriately signalled as a quote by being placed in quotation
marks.
3.1.3.1.2.
the citation of a wrong source in a bibliography in order to evade
plagiarism checks.
3.1.3.1.3.
copied from others and which has been subjected to minor or
superficial linguistic changes and presented as the student’s own work, with
or without citation.
3.1.3.1.4.
minimally adapted and closely paraphrased from the original source.
3.1.3.1.5.
not part of the commonly accepted phrasing or usage for academic
subject of the work.
3.1.3.2.
Synthesising material in an open book examination or assessment using a
permitted source but not appropriately acknowledging the source.
3.1.3.3.
Collusion between students as evidenced by structure, sources, a block or
blocks of copied text, (including copied text subjected to minor or superficial
linguistic changes).
3.1.3.4.
Blocks of copied illustrations, computer code, graph, diagrams or other
resource taken from another student or the work of others without appropriate
referencing.
3.1.3.5.
Results or data which cannot be substantiated on the basis of the material
submitted by the student.
4

3.1.3.6.
The use of content generated by AI and failing to acknowledge this
contribution with referencing and quotations.
3.1.3.7.
Stylistic, language, academic and other irregularities e.g. document data,
reports from other individuals, which suggest the student may not have authored
the work themselves.
3.2. Poor academic practice
3.2.1. Poor academic practice involves minor infringement of examination conditions or
accepted citation practice where there is evidence that the student did not apply the
appropriate rules of the assessment or academic writing and/or where the extent of
copied or possessed material does not meet the level of significance such that it can be
considered academic malpractice. Poor academic practice will not instigate disciplinary
proceedings but can be taken account of through the marking process and the provision
of advice and guidance. Poor academic practice may include (but is not limited to):
3.2.1.1.
A limited amount of material or copied text expressing ideas or concepts taken
from the work of others without appropriate citation, but largely presented in the
student’s own words.
3.2.1.2.
A limited amount of material or copied text where the source is referenced in
the bibliography but is not properly cited within the body of the assessment.
3.2.1.3.
A limited amount of material or copied text that has been subject to reasonable
linguistic and phrasing changes but is without citation.
3.2.1.4.
Collaboration between students which has led to some minor similarities in
structure, source or copied text, but where there remains sufficient originality in the
students’ respective work submissions.
3.2.1.5.
Pieces of work which are largely constructed of the work and words of others,
but which has been attributed to the source.
3.2.1.6.
At a very early stage of an assessment, voluntarily surrendering unauthorised
materials that the student was unaware of.
3.2.1.7.
The possession of unauthorised materials, which are so minor in content, that
they would unlikely provide any meaningful benefit to the student.
3.3. Misconduct in research
3.3.1. For the purposes of student discipline, research misconduct is defined by the same
types of research misconduct as listed under the Code of Practice for Investigating
Concerns about the Conduct of Research (“Code of Practice”). Similarly, what is
considered to be poor practice in research will also mirror the definitions under the Code
of Practice.
3.3.2. Some types of academic malpractice may constitute types of research misconduct
and vice versa. Where there is such an overlap, the disciplinary process will usually
focus on considering the dominant allegation(s) against the student.
3.3.3. Research misconduct can be committed by a student at any level of study, as part of
work that is being, or has been, conducted or produced for the purposes of assessment
or publication. Where a concern regarding the conduct of research arises about a
5

current student, this would normally be dealt with through the disciplinary process,
rather than the Code of Practice.
3.3.4. If the alleged conduct affects a published piece of research work or a supervisor is
implicated in a complaint about research misconduct then the Code of Practice would
usually take precedence in the first instance for the purposes of investigating the
allegation being made. Allegations that might meet either of these criteria should be
referred to the Head of Research Governance, Ethics and Integrity as per the Code of
Practice.
3.3.5. At the conclusion of an investigation under the Code of Practice, disciplinary action
may be taken along with recommended actions to address the research misconduct e.g.
requesting a publisher removes a piece of work.

4. Detection 3
4.1. General
4.1.1. Disciplinary action for academic malpractice can usually only be taken where a
student has submitted summative assessment containing malpractice. Malpractice in
formative assessment may be more appropriately addressed through feedback and the
marking process and with advice and guidance (e.g. an informal warning without a
disciplinary panel). Disciplinary action cannot usually be taken prior to submission
unless there are credible reasons, such as clear evidence of engagement of an essay
mill. If an academic member of staff notices malpractice in work prior to it being
submitted, it is reasonable to expect that the member of staff would warn the student of
the consequences of committing malpractice.
4.1.2. Suspected malpractice may be detected through different means depending on the
assessment. For example, a student may be found with unauthorised material by an
examination invigilator, a Turnitin Report may flag text similarity, or other individuals
may report student misbehaviour. To reach a point of making an allegation against a
student, it is important to have gathered and objectively reviewed an appropriate body
of evidence leading to the allegation, so that there are reasons identified for bringing a
case. A case cannot be considered for disciplinary without that evidence and narrative.
The scale of information gathering and review will vary according to the case, for
example, in a plagiarism case an assignment may only need review by an academic
whereas in a collusion case there might need to be some preliminary interviews with the
parties involved. The sections below identify some common methods of detection and
review. If a case does not fit neatly into those categories colleagues can adopt a hybrid
approach drawing on any good practice that is suitable to the case at hand.
4.1.3. Examiners should continue to mark the work where possible as though the work does
not contain academic malpractice. The mark should be withheld from the student
pending any disciplinary action (this may lead to a pause on a student's ability to
progress on a programme until disciplinary action has concluded). It is acknowledged
that marking can prove difficult in some cases especially when there is substantial
academic malpractice. If examiners feel unable to mark the work then they should
indicate this with the disciplinary referral.
4.1.4. The University should normally decide upon whether a disciplinary referral is required
within 20 working days from when suspected malpractice is detected. This timeframe
3

This links to the Assessment sections of the Procedure for Summary Disciplinary Panels and the Procedure for the
University Disciplinary Panel.

6

may be need to be extended depending on the level of information gathering required.
Where a student has been contacted as part of an information gathering exercise, it is
good practice to inform them at the conclusion of this process whether their case is
being referred for formal disciplinary action or not.
4.2. Written assignments
4.2.1. Most essay or text-based assignments are submitted through Turnitin. This software
allows the comparison of the work submitted for assessment, with other pieces of work
or publications stored on Turnitin’s database. Turnitin detects whether there is any
similarity in the work to the other sources and produces a report showing where the
similarity exists, the amount of similarity and a reference to the source. Turnitin alone
does not confirm the presence of malpractice; an academic judgement must be made
to reach this conclusion. Students are discouraged from using alternative software in
an attempt to identify malpractice prior to the submission of an assessment; alternative
software can be less comprehensive than Turnitin and return inaccurate results.
4.2.2. References in this document to Turnitin should be read as to include alternative
software which the University uses and identifies. For example, Cadmus is used in
some areas of the University, and the data from its learner analytics may provide an
indication of academic malpractice e.g. time spent on producing the work. The
University does not currently use software which claims to detect Generative AI;
common indicators of malpractice, and information sources, should be reviewed as with
other forms of suspected malpractice.
4.2.3. It is expected that examiners of assignments will:
4.2.3.1.
Review any Turnitin report to help determine whether academic malpractice
may have occurred.
4.2.3.2.
In cases of poor academic practice, mark the piece of work in the usual way
taking account of the poor academic practice and provide feedback to the student.
4.2.3.3.

In cases of suspected academic malpractice:

4.2.3.3.1.
Acquire the original source material where possible and indicate what
sections of the material have been taken by the student, cross-referring to
the material’s location in the student’s work.
4.2.3.3.2.
Produce a statement/report, explaining why they consider there to be
malpractice in the student’s work. The statement/report needs to describe
the case to a panel who potentially are unfamiliar with the work and material.
4.2.3.3.3.
Continue to mark the work where possible but withhold the mark from
the student.
4.2.3.3.4.
Send the information above to an officer in the School (“School
Officer”). This will usually be an Authorised University Officer (“AUO”) (as
defined in the Regulation) 4, or nominee thereof e.g. Academic Malpractice
Officer, Programme Director, Director of Teaching and Learning etc.
4.2.4. If academic malpractice is first suspected during a viva for a thesis or similar piece of
work, then the examination should continue, as this will allow discussion that may
4

See section 7 of Regulation XVII. AUOs are University staff e.g. a Head of School, who have the authority to
investigate and take disciplinary action against students. This includes delegated nominees of the AUO, and which
might include the School Officer.

7

evidence the extent to which the work is
that of the student. The examiners should
thereafter produce a statement, cross referring to the viva and written work, in keeping
with 4.2.2.3
4.2.5. The School Officer will decide, on the balance of probabilities, whether there is poor
academic practice in the work or potential academic malpractice. In the case of the
former, the piece of work will be referred back to the examiner in question, with
appropriate advice as to how to proceed. In the case of the latter, the School Officer
should arrange for disciplinary action to be taken.
4.3. Examination malpractice
4.3.1. Students must be informed of examination conditions before the start of the
examination e.g. that they should not have any unauthorised materials on their person.
Students are expected to complete examinations themselves independently, but
sometimes allowances may be made to allow use of certain resources e.g. textbooks,
websites. The responsibility to check and comply with examination conditions rests with
the student.
4.3.2. Physical/’in-person’ examinations (i.e. examinations taken in a physical exam
hall/venue): Invigilators monitor the conditions of physical examinations, including
checking student identification and checking for unauthorised material. Where exam
malpractice is detected, the preliminary details of the incident should be recorded, such
as the type and content of the material/malpractice, the time it was found, the
examination title and start time etc. Students may be asked to leave the examination
at the point unauthorised material is detected whilst the above details are obtained and
the material is confiscated, but they may later be allowed to return to complete the
examination in the time remaining.
4.3.2.1.
The student will normally be asked to attend a post-examination interview with
a member of staff at the Scheduling Team within the Division of Student and
Academic Services (if the examination was arranged centrally) or their academic
School (if the examination was arranged locally). At the interview additional
information will be sought from the student. As per the Assessment stage of
Regulation XVII, it may be determined that there is no case to answer, that the
case can be addressed with advice and guidance or that the case requires referral
to a disciplinary panel. Should a disciplinary panel be deemed appropriate, any
information collected must be sufficient enough for presentation to a disciplinary
panel.
4.3.2.2.
For centrally arranged examinations, the Scheduling Team will notify the
student and the student’s academic School of a referral. The School may need
to provide further details for the case to be actioned e.g. academic impact of
penalties. The case will then be handled by the Division of Campus Life (Advice
and Response Team).
4.3.3. Online examinations: the handling of cases will depend on the format of the
examination and whether it is invigilated. Where an online examination is invigilated
then an invigilator should speak with the student at the time highlighting their concerns
and gathering preliminary details similarly to 4.3.1. The invigilator's report will then be
passed for further consideration to the School Officer, or AUO, from the area with
responsibility for administering the examination. The School Officer or AUO may
complete a documentary review of the information available and/or gather more
information to help make a decision by contacting (e.g. an email or meeting) the student,
or others involved, before confirming whether the case requires formal disciplinary
action.
8

4.3.4. Where examination malpractice is detected after an examination has ended, then the
School Officer or AUO from the area responsible for administering the examination
should review the information that has led to the allegation to determine whether a
formal disciplinary referral needs to be made. The School Officer or AUO may identify
that further correspondence or meetings with parties involved are required before a
decision can be reached.
4.4. Contract cheating
4.4.1. The University sometimes receives reports from third parties alleging that a student
may have submitted work which they have not produced. In such cases, enquiries may
be made with the reporting party (e.g. association to the student, copies of the work,
correspondence) to help indicate whether there is potential malpractice in the work. The
information gathered may be sufficient to instigate further enquiry with the student
concerned or to refer a case to a disciplinary panel. The absence of necessary
information from the reporting party may mean a case cannot be progressed any further.
Care should be taken to not divulge personal data about a student to a reporting party.
4.4.2. If there is a concern, based on indicators of malpractice, that a student may have
commissioned a piece of work from a third party, but there is no direct evidence of this,
or the information available does not satisfy the balance of probabilities, then in
agreement with the School Officer a viva voce can be arranged to give the student the
opportunity to demonstrate that they:
4.4.2.1.

Produced the work;

4.4.2.2.

Undertook the reading and research themselves;

4.4.2.3.

Undertook the preparatory work themselves;

4.4.2.4.

Understand what they have written.

4.4.3. If a viva voce is held, the following principles shall be met:
4.4.3.1.
If a viva voce is to be conducted it should not normally take place more than
30 working days after the assessment feedback deadline.
4.4.3.2.
The student should be given at least five working days’ notice of the
requirement to attend the viva voce. An explanation of what a viva voce is, the
purpose of it and the potential outcomes should be outlined in the invitation. It
should be made clear that the viva voce is arranged due to the detection of
potential academic malpractice and it is to allow the student an opportunity to
demonstrate that the work is their own; it will not contribute to any mark obtained
for the piece of work.
4.4.3.3.
Two members of academic staff (at least one of whom must be a subject
specialist) must conduct the viva voce; this will normally be the School Officer and
the examiner of the assessment.
4.4.3.4.
The student may be accompanied by a person of their choice for support only
(normally a fellow student, member of staff or Students’ Union representative).
Any individual accompanying the student should under no circumstances
participate in the viva voce.

9

4.4.3.5.
Reasonable adjustments must be made to ensure that candidates with
additional support needs are not disadvantaged for reasons relating to a long-term
medical condition, sensory impairment, specific learning difficulty and /or disability.
4.4.3.6.

The viva voce will not normally exceed 45 minutes.

4.4.3.7.
Depending on situational circumstances, the viva voce can be conducted via
video link.
4.4.3.8.
Intensive questions are expected. The questions asked should provide the
student with the opportunity to demonstrate that the work is their own.
4.4.3.9.
An accurate record of the viva voce should be taken; this record may be used
to form the evidence base for any future disciplinary hearing. It may be necessary
for an administrative member of staff to be present at the viva voce to make the
record. The student is entitled to have a copy of the record.
4.4.4. The viva voce can have one of two outcomes:
4.4.4.1.
The staff conducting the viva voce will confirm that they accept that the student
wrote the work in question; no further action will be taken. The work should then
be marked on its own merit, if it has not already been marked.
4.4.4.2.
If the staff conducting the viva voce still remain doubtful of the authorship of
the work in question, or the student admits that it is not their work, then the case
should be referred for disciplinary action. The viva voce, in itself, will not result in
a penalty being applied; a penalty can only be applied by a disciplinary panel.

5. Case handling
5.1. When academic malpractice has been identified following section 4 above, the AUO
responsible for assessing the allegation should gather any supplementary information that
may be relevant for a disciplinary hearing. In particular, they should enquire as to whether
a student has any previous offences for academic malpractice as this will indicate the
appropriate panel to refer a case to. This information is usually retained in the student’s
School record. This will assist the AUO in determining whether a case can be heard by a
Summary Disciplinary Panel (“SDP”) or if the case should be referred to the University
Disciplinary Panel (“UDP”).
5.2. The detection of academic malpractice will not normally lead to the review of a student’s
previous assessments, unless there is a reasonable suspicion that they may contain
malpractice. If this is the case, prior to a disciplinary hearing, the AUO may review previous
pieces assessments, but this will not normally extend to assessments outside the student’s
current level of study.
5.3. Cases will be handled as follows*:
Dealt with by
Case types
Fast-track
(School,
● Can be used with minor incidents of academic
Faculty or Campus Life)
malpractice, usually where there is a first offence, for a
student at an early year of study, the amount of
malpractice is minimal and the matter (if established)
will attract a low penalty. See also the Assessment
section of the Procedure for Summary Disciplinary
Panels / Procedure for the University Disciplinary Panel.
10

School-based SDP 5

●
●

UG programmes levels 4, 5 and CPD – first offence
PGT programmes taught element – first offence

Faculty-based SDP

●
●
●
●
●

UG programmes levels 4, 5 and CPD – second offences
UG level 6 and above – first offence
PGT programmes taught element – second offence
PGT dissertation element – first offence
PGR taught element – first offence

Campus
SDP 6

●

All UG or PGT programmes – first and second offences
of
examination
malpractice
in
examinations
administered by the Division of Student and Academic
Services following the case handling structure set out
within this table. Penalties open to a Campus Life SDP
will align with what may be available to case types
handled at School or Faculty SDPs (above).
Academic malpractice allegations which cannot be
addressed through the usual School / Faculty routes.
UG programmes levels 4, 5 and CPD – third (or further)
offences
UG programmes level 6 and above – second (or further)
offences
PGT programmes taught element – third (or further)
offences
PGT programmes dissertation element – any
subsequent offence
PGR taught element – subsequent offence
PGR progression assessment, thesis or viva – first
offence
Any student – a significant offence
Misconduct in research by a student at any level of
study if the criteria under 3.3 has been met.

Life-based

●
UDP

●
●
●
●
●
●

Head
of
Research
Governance, Ethics and
Integrity

●
●

5.4. The original person who reported the alleged malpractice should not be a member of the
disciplinary panel. Additionally, where a student has already been interviewed or attended
a viva as part of the information gathering exercise, any future disciplinary panel should not
include, as a member of the panel, the same examiner or School Officer.
5.5. Where it is alleged that a student has committed significant academic malpractice they will
normally be referred to the UDP. In addition to the table under paragraph 5.2, the following
may be of consideration in deciding whether a case is significant:
5.5.1. The suspected amount of malpractice is a particularly high proportion of the
assessment.
5.5.2. The assessment containing suspected malpractice is high credit bearing and/or
important to a student’s award or progression.

5

In cases concerning the University College for Interdisciplinary Learning (“UCIL”), students will be from a range of
academic Schools. Cases of academic malpractice detected by a UCIL unit convenor will be referred by UCIL to the
student’s home School for consideration.
6
SDP cases handled in this Division are usually led by Professional Services staff; exam misconduct cases will be
conducted in partnership with academic colleagues, and where possible, with at least one academic panel member.

11

5.5.3. It is suspected that multiple assessments in a single assessment period contain
academic malpractice.
5.5.4. The penalty applied in any previous case. If a student has already had the maximum
penalty applied for a first offence at summary level, then a subsequent offence may
attract a penalty that is open only to the UDP.
5.5.5. The penalties open to summary level do not reflect the severity of the offence i.e. it is
considered that the student’s overall degree award should be reduced e.g. from an
Honours degree to a Diploma.
5.5.6. Where there is prima facie evidence of substantial efforts to commit malpractice and
avoid detection.
5.6. If the same offence relates to multiple students, but for one or more students it is a
subsequent offence, then the University will aim to consider all students at the same level
for consistency in the decision making. As part of any investigation or review, it is important
for the School Officer or AUO to attempt to identify each student's role in the misconduct.
Previous relevant conduct can be taken into account in the application of a penalty. Where
a case relates to a large number of students, such that it would be impractical for all to be
considered at the same hearing, or it may result in unreasonable delay, consideration may
be given to handling cases at different levels based on the table divisions in 5.3 with a logical
ordering of cases identified and dialogue maintained between case handlers.
5.7. Disciplinary hearings that relate to malpractice should be academic led or coordinated in
partnership with academic colleagues. As per the Procedure for Summary Disciplinary
Panels, it is recommended that SDPs considering allegations of academic malpractice
comprise at least two persons, with the Chair usually being an academic with appropriate
experience and sufficient knowledge of malpractice. Where an allegation may result in a
higher penalty and the consequences may be more severe e.g. a subsequent offence, it is
recommended that a panel is extended to three persons. Members of Professional Services
will normally support malpractice disciplinary hearings but may, where they have a
substantive knowledge of malpractice and experience in discipline, be included in the
membership of a disciplinary panel.
5.8. Examples of case handling:
5.8.1. An Undergraduate student has a first offence of academic malpractice on file for
plagiarism from their first year. This was dealt with by a School-based SDP. A second
offence arises, but this relates to examination malpractice (unauthorised material) in a
second-year examination; this is dealt with by a Campus Life-based SDP.
5.8.2. A first-year Undergraduate student has a first offence on file relating to examination
misconduct (unauthorised material) that was dealt with by a Campus Life-based SDP.
A second offence of academic malpractice (plagiarism) arises and so this is dealt with
by a Faculty-based SDP.
5.8.3. A Postgraduate Taught student is believed to have committed substantial plagiarism
in a high credit bearing piece of work (dissertation). Although it is a first offence, the
malpractice is considered to be significant and so is referred to the UDP.
5.8.4. Three level 5 Undergraduate students are believed to have colluded in a piece of
work. One of the students has a previous offence of malpractice on file and so the case
is referred from School level to Faculty. The Faculty-based SDP later differentiates the
penalties applied, with the student who had a first offence on file, receiving a higher
penalty.
Related procedures:
● Procedure for Summary Disciplinary Panels
● Procedure for the University Disciplinary Panel

12

6. Document control
Document control box
Policy / Procedure title:

Academic Malpractice Procedure

Date updated:

November 2023 (in effect January 2024)

Approving body:

Student Conduct and Discipline Committee

Version:

Unknown (at least 4)

Supersedes:

Academic Malpractice Procedure (May 2022)

Previous review dates:

2018/19

Next review date:

2024/25
● Statute XXI (Conduct, discipline and academic
progress of students)
● Regulation XVII (Conduct and Discipline of
Students)
High / Medium (delete as applicable)
● Procedure for Summary Disciplinary Panels
● Procedure for the University Disciplinary Panel

Related Statutes, Ordinances,
General Regulations:
Equality relevance outcome:
Related policies/procedures/guidance:
Policy owner:
Lead contact:

Sarah Littlejohn (Director of Campus Life)
(Sarah.Littlejohn@manchester.ac.uk)
Matthew Valentine (Advice and Response Manager)
(matthew.valentine@manchester.ac.uk)

Amendment history
Version
1
2

Date
07/2014
04/2019

3

05/2021

4

05/2022

5

11/2023
(effective
01/2024)
03/2025

6

Reason for change
Substantive re-write of the procedure, including definitions and
detection.
Multiple changes, to reflect change in practice. Main updates
concern examination misconduct, due to move to online
assessments, and collusion.
Changes around 4.3.2 and 5.3 due to responsibility changes
following SEP restructure, mainly Scheduling Team (formerly Exam
Team) remain responsible for information gathering for centrally
arranged exams but Campus Life now responsible for any
disciplinary hearings that result from central exam malpractice.
Multiple updates agreed by Student Conduct and Discipline
Committee, notably to definitions, set out student expectations,
include reference to Generative AI, future proof and refine wording.
Updated paragraph 5.7 to remove Senior Lecturer requirement as
Chairs. Updated links at 2.4 and 3.1.2.6

13
