Guidance for use of Generative AI tools | Information Systems & Technology 
 Skip to main content
Get Started with IT
Guidance for use of Generative AI tools
You are here
Get Started with IT > Generative AI use at MIT > Guidance for use of Generative AI tools
Menu
Get Started with IS&T
Our Services
Get Software
Secure Computing
About IS&T
Get Help
Search the Knowledge Base
Request Help from the Service Desk
Phone: 617-253-1101
Email: helpdesk@mit.edu
Create a digital MIT identity and access Institute systems and IT resources
Students
Faculty and Staff
Visitors and Guests
Generative AI use at MIT
Guidance for use of Generative AI Tools
Generative AI Tools Available at MIT
 Using Generative AI at MIT
Generative AI tools can support many types of work at MIT. However, using these tools requires care — especially when working with Institute data. MIT work should be conducted using MIT-licensed AI tools whenever Institute data is involved. 
Generative AI tools licensed by MIT are acceptable for use with Institute low- and medium-risk data. High-risk data should never be used with generative AI tools. 
 Determine the Risk Level of Your Data Before Using AI Tools
The Institute's data classification framework is found on the Infoprotect website. Use the self-assessment tool and see the risk level definitions with examples to determine the risk level of your data. 
 Publicly Available GenAI Tool
 MIT-Licensed GenAI Tool
 Low Risk Data
 Not recommended*
 Allowed
 Medium Risk Data
 Not allowed
 Allowed
 High Risk Data
 Not allowed**
 Not allowed**
*For MIT-related work, low-risk information should be used only in MIT-licensed generative AI tools. Public generative AI tools may use submitted data for model training or external sharing and are not governed by MIT agreements. MIT provides licensed tools, such as Parley, that are designed to support Institute work while protecting MIT data. 
**Do not use high-risk information with Generative AI tools, including MIT enterprise Generative AI tools. If you have used high-risk data in a Generative AI tool, contact security@mit.edu immediately.
If you are unsure if an AI tool is right for your data’s risk level, contact ai-guidance@mit.edu.
 Generative AI Tools Licensed by MIT
MIT enterprise agreements govern the safety and security of data entered into MIT-approved tools. A list of Generative AI tools currently licensed by IS&T can be found on the IS&T website.
If you are unsure of which tool to start with, use MIT’s Parley platform, which allows users to select from a variety of LLMs. All the models in Parley are protected by MIT data privacy agreements, which prevent use of MIT data for model training and external sharing by the third-party platforms.
If you wish to purchase new Generative AI tools, you must go through the VPF procurement process to ensure the vendor agreement has the appropriate terms. IS&T works closely with the MIT IT Governance Committee, Information Technology Policy Committee, and the Office of General Counsel to determine appropriate terms for vendor agreements relating to generative AI.
 Generative AI Tools for MIT Education and Research
MIT's Chair of the Faculty has recommended the use of these resources on generative AI and teaching provided by the Teaching and Learning Laboratory. This guidance does not address all issues for consideration when using generative AI tools as part of MIT research, nor does this guidance focus on when MIT researchers are creating generative AI tools or publicly releasing datasets/information that could become ingestible data for use by MIT researchers or third parties for training generative AI tools. Please contact mitogc@mit.edu for further guidance on research-related applications or development of AI tools.
Researchers should also refer to the COUCHES Guidance on AI in Research and the MIT Libraries Guidance on Citing AI-Generated Content. 
 Generative AI Tools with Patent and Invention-Related Data (TLO Guidance)
Additional restrictions apply to patent-related materials and invention disclosures. See the TLO Statement on Using Public Generative AI Tools in Patent‑Related Activities for complete information. 
 Compliance with Federal and State Laws and Orders
As with any use of information technology at MIT, ensure that your use of generative AI tools and services complies with all applicable federal and state laws and orders (including, without limitation, FERPA, HIPAA, Massachusetts Data Protection Standards, export control laws, and Executive Order on the Safe, Secure, and Trustworthy Development and Use of Artificial Intelligence), Institute policies (including 10.1 Academic and Research Misconduct, 11.0 Privacy and Disclosure of Personal Information, and 13.0 Information Policies), follows all guidelines outlined on Information Protection, the Institute's Written Information Security Program (WISP), and complies with any additional policies established by your department, lab, center, or institute (DLCI).
 Resources
IS&T's list of generative AI tools available at MIT
Report of the Working Group on Artificial Intelligence in Administration and Operations
Related MIT Policies
 9.2 Personal Conduct and Responsibilities Towards Students and Employees
 10.0 Academic and Research Misconduct and Dishonesty
 Academic Integrity at MIT
 Policies Regarding Student Behavior
 Responsible and Ethical Conduct at MIT
MIT’s Written Information Security Program
 Information Protection at MIT
Intellectual Property
 Patenting and Commercializing Your Invention
Patent Applications and Invention Disclosures 
 Technology Licensing Office Guidelines for Using Generative AI in Patent-Related Activities
Publishing
 Scholarly Communications: Publishing and Research
 Citing AI tools
Sponsored Research & Proprietary Information of Third Parties
 Industry Sponsored Research Agreements
Page updated 6/23/2026
Related Pages and How To
Generative AI use at MIT 
Generative AI tools available at MIT
