Academic Integrity Policy

17 June 2026
Version: 3.0

www.mtu.ie/policies

Contents

1.

Purpose ........................................................................................................................... 2

2.

Scope .............................................................................................................................. 2

3.

Definitions ........................................................................................................................ 3

4.

Roles and Responsibilities ............................................................................................... 6

5.

Policy ............................................................................................................................... 8

6.

Appeal ........................................................................................................................... 13

7.

Compliance .................................................................................................................... 14

Document Control ................................................................................................................ 15
B.

Revision History ............................................................................................................. 15

C.

Relevant/Related Existing Internal/External Documents ................................................ 15

D.

Consultation History ....................................................................................................... 15

E.

Approvals ....................................................................................................................... 16

F.

Responsible for Communication and Implementation .................................................... 16

1

1.

Purpose

Munster Technological University (MTU) is committed to fostering and protecting a culture of
academic integrity to ensure the validity of all academic endeavours in the University.
Academic integrity must be preserved to protect the reliability of the qualifications awarded
by the University, and to ensure that our graduates have respect for knowledge and ideas, as
well as an understanding of their ethical responsibility towards the work and ideas of others.
The security and, therefore, integrity, of academic standards is central to trust and confidence
in higher education; a fundamental key to securing standards is the integrity of assessment.
The challenges presented to upholding academic integrity have been compounded in the
context of increasingly sophisticated, accessible and low-cost cheating services. Developing
strategies, underpinned by institutional policies and procedures, to protect and reinforce
academic integrity is even more important as providers and learners adapt to the new realities
represented by the move to blended and online learning.
The Academic Integrity Guidelines of the National Academic Integrity Network (NAIN)
underpin and inform MTU’s approach to academic integrity. The guidelines promote the
principle that upholding academic integrity is the collective responsibility of all stakeholders
in a higher education institution. This includes teaching academic staff, programme
developers, professional support staff, librarians, international officers, quality officers,
senior managers, learners and their representatives amongst others. Collective knowledge,
commitment and consistent, informed practice are required to ensure this principle is realised
in practice.
This policy is intended to:

2.

•

set out the expectations of students and staff of MTU in upholding academic
integrity and preventing academic misconduct;

•

define types of academic misconduct;

•

provide guidance on the detection of academic misconduct;

•

outline the means of addressing possible instances of academic misconduct
when they have been detected.

Scope

This policy applies to all registered students of MTU and to all staff in MTU. This policy applies
to all taught programmes of study leading to an award of MTU, including:
1. Joint programmes,
2. Taught modules on postgraduate research programmes, and
3. MTU programmes delivered collaboratively with other providers as may be authorised
by the University.

2

The policy applies to all module credits achieved including those attained through RPL and
micro credentials.
Where there is more than one university policy (and/or procedure) applicable to any one
matter, the Vice President Academic Affairs & Registrar, in consultation with relevant offices
and post holders, shall decide which of the university’s policies (and/or procedures) should
have priority or be the most appropriate in the circumstances, and may direct the
continuation of some procedure(s) (and/or policies) and the suspension of others pending the
outcome of the former. It is possible that more than one policy/procedure could be invoked
in relation to the same issue, either concurrently or consecutively, as the Vice President
Academic Affairs & Registrar may deem appropriate.

3.

Definitions

Academic Council (AC)

Academic Unit

Academic Integrity Advisor (AIA)

The statutory body that, subject to Section
17 of the Technological Universities Act
2018, controls the academic affairs of the
University. Within this general remit, the
particular functions of Academic Council
include designing and
developing the academic programmes of
the University; promoting stakeholder
involvement in these programmes; making
recommendations to the University on
matters relating to research, admission and
retention of students, academic regulations
including marks & standards and
assessment appeals, and the awarding of
scholarships and prizes; and discharging any
other functions delegated to it by the
University. The membership of the Academic
Council
is
appointed
in
accordance with legislative requirements
and the regulations of the University
approved by the Governing Body.
The Academic Unit is a school or
department which has responsibility for a
suite of programmes in a specific discipline
or related disciplines defined by the
University.
The Academic Integrity Advisor (AIA) is a
member of academic staff that provides

3

advice and support to staff on matters
related to academic integrity.
Academic Integrity Officer (AIO)

Leading role in collaboration with staff and
student body in cultivating embedding and
safeguarding academic integrity and
dealing with allegations of academic
misconduct.

Academic Misconduct Register (AMR)

The Academic Misconduct Register is a
database of records on Academic
Misconduct.

Approval

The process whereby documents must be
approved by the relevant committee or
board.

Approval Authority

The appropriate level of governance to
approve a document e.g., Governing Body,
Academic Council.

Consultation

The discussion with relevant stakeholders
to get their advice or opinion on policies.

Departmental Review Panel (DRP)

The Departmental Review Panel (DRP) is
convened by the Module Coordinator/Head
of Department to consider and decide upon
allegations of minor academic misconduct.
The date that a document comes into effect
following approval by the relevant approval
authority.

Effective Date

Governing Body (GB)

The authority established by law to govern
the University which manages and controls
the affairs of the University.

Module Coordinator

The coordination of a module will remain
with a single Academic Unit. The Academic
Unit responsible will be best suited, in the
opinion of the Academic Council, on the
recommendation of the Registrar to coordinate all instances of delivery of the
module. The Head of the Academic Unit
will act as Module Coordinator.

4

Munster Technological University (MTU)

A Technological University established on
the 1st of January 2021 through the merger
of Cork Institute of Technology and the
Institute of Technology, Tralee. It is a multicampus technological university,
contributing to the region through the
provision of academic programmes that
support student development and
opportunities, education and research.

National Academic Integrity Network
(NAIN)

Network established by Quality and
Qualifications Ireland (QQI) to support
Higher Education Institutions (HEIs) in
matters of academic integrity.

Policy

A written statement that clearly indicates
the position and values of the University on
a given subject.

Policy Author

The person(s) responsible for drafting,
consulting, and submitting a draft of the
final policy version to the Policy Owner.

Policy Owner

The appropriate individual(s),
department(s) or support unit(s) of the
University who is responsible for oversight
of the policy development steps across the
full policy lifecycle. This includes
responsibility for finalising the policy prior
to consideration, recommendation and/or
initial approval/final approval.

Policy Working Group

A group of stakeholders collaborating on
policy development, consultation and
review of policies which are deemed to be
multi-disciplinary and have a wider impact
on multiple functional areas.

Procedure

A series of interrelated steps or step by
step instructions to implement the policy.

5

Records

The information created, received, and
maintained as evidence and information by
an organisation or person, in pursuance of
legal obligations or in the transaction of
business.

Regulations

The rules governing specific operations
within the University.

Respondent

A person(s) who replies to something or
defends a position in relation to something.

Review

An in-depth look at existing policies or
other documents such as procedures,
standards, guidelines to determine if a
policy is still needed, whether the purpose
and goal of the policy is still being met,
determine if changes are required to
improve the effectiveness or clarity of the
policy and procedures, ensure that
appropriate education, monitoring and
ongoing review of the policy is occurring.

Review Date

The date that a document (e.g. policy,
procedure, standard, guideline, protocol)
will be reviewed.

Status

The various stages that documents (e.g.
policy, procedure, standard, guideline,
protocol) go through i.e., draft, review,
approval.

University Academic Misconduct Board
(UAMB)

The University Academic Misconduct Board
is a standing board of the University which
is appointed by the Academic Council and is
responsible for investigating and
adjudicating allegations of Academic
Misconduct.

4.

Roles and Responsibilities

Responsible Office/Person(s)

Role
6

Academic Council and Governing Body

Approval of this Policy is the remit of MTU
Academic Council and Governing Body.

Vice President Academic Affairs & Registrar
(VPAAR)

Executive level responsibility for oversight
and implementation of the policy and
procedure. Responsibility for maintaining
the Academic Misconduct Register (AMR).

Academic Integrity Officer (AIO)

Leading role in collaboration with staff and
student body in cultivating embedding and
safeguarding academic integrity and
dealing with allegations of academic
misconduct.

Academic Integrity Advisor (AIA)

Academic role that provides
advice and support to staff on matters
related to academic integrity.

Module Coordinator/Head of Department

Implementation of the policy.

Examinations Officer

Operation of examinations in accordance
with the University’s policies and
procedures, including, inter alia, processes
for detecting, dealing with and reporting
breaches of examination regulations and
code of conduct.

7

5.

Policy

5.1

Introduction

NAIN has adopted the following definition of academic integrity 1: ‘Compliance with ethical
and professional principles, standards and practices, and consistent system of values, that
serves as guidance for making decisions and taking actions in education, research and
scholarship’.
Academic misconduct covers all behaviours which contravene academic integrity.
5.2
Principles
5.2.1 Academic integrity is based on the principles of honesty, trust, fairness, respect and
responsibility including the courage to act as needed to uphold academic integrity.
5.2.2 This policy and its related procedure will be implemented in a consistent and effective
manner across the University.
5.2.3 There is a whole-of-university commitment to and support of a culture of academic
honesty and integrity. The maintenance and sustainability of academic integrity is the
responsibility, and to the benefit of all staff and students of the University.
5.2.4 Staff will act as exemplars in matters of academic integrity.
5.2.5 MTU will support and protect staff and students who report academic misconduct.
5.2.6 All instances of alleged academic misconduct will be investigated effectively and
efficiently. Appropriate action will be taken in relation to all alleged incidents detected.
5.2.7 All cases will be dealt with in a timely manner and in accordance with the time periods
set out in this policy and associated procedure. Communication is normally via MTU
email, and it is the responsibility of both staff and students to monitor their emails
regularly during term time.
5.2.8 The University will provide information, training, guidance and other supports to
students and staff to facilitate the effective implementation of this policy.
5.2.9 Consistency and fairness, the principles of natural justice, confidentiality and respect
for privacy and dignity will be observed throughout the process for maintaining
academic integrity and dealing with academic misconduct.
5.2.10 Penalties imposed for academic misconduct will be proportionate, appropriate,
objective and relevant.
5.2.11 The determination of the penalties will take into account the gravity of the academic
misconduct, the scale of the unfair advantage potentially gained, and the degree to
which the act of misconduct was premeditated and deliberate.
5.2.12 MTU will collect data on the details of identified breaches and use that data for
1

NAIN 2023: National Principles and Lexicon of Common Terms.

8

ongoing internal quality assurance and enhancement and external reporting as
required.
5.2.13 Records on academic integrity breaches will be kept in accordance with this policy and
associated procedure and the University’s Data Retention Policy.

5.3
Upholding Academic Integrity
The University is committed to fostering a culture of developing and maintaining academic
integrity and has incorporated measures to support a sustainable approach to academic
integrity. These specifically include the following:
5.3.1 Embedding Academic Integrity in University policies and procedures
The University recognises the importance of incorporating academic integrity into all
aspects of teaching, learning and assessment. Those include:
o programme development;
o assessment design and implementation;
o pedagogical approaches;
o supports for students and staff; and
o robust administrative systems for record-keeping.
5.3.2 Supports for staff
o Staff will have professional development opportunities for training and
awareness raising in relation to academic integrity and the institutional
approach to it.
o Staff will be assisted and advised while reporting alleged cases of academic
misconduct.
o Training and advice for staff will be provided on teaching, learning and
assessment approaches to prevent academic misconduct.
o Training will be provided on relevant university policies.
o Staff will be able to refer suspected cases of academic misconduct to a
specialist function which can analyse files and other digital content, and, as
appropriate, internet and software usage to help gather evidence to determine
the probability and extent of possible misconduct.

9

5.3.3 Supports for students
There is a planned approach to training and support for students in relation to
academic integrity. As a part of this, academic integrity is recognised to be a core
component of any induction process. Recognition will be given in these processes to
students from different educational cultures, and content and advice will be relevant
and specific to the Irish higher education context.
Training and advice for students will be provided on:
o The importance of upholding academic integrity and safeguarding the
integrity of MTU awards;
o Good academic practice;
o How to avoid engaging in academic misconduct;
o Academic integrity policies and procedures;
o Consequences of academic misconduct; and
o Systems used by the University to prevent and detect academic misconduct.
5.4

Preventing Academic Misconduct

5.4.1 The University may choose to actively block online resources from campus wired and
Wi-Fi networks. Such blocks may be of a temporary or permanent nature and may
include (but not be limited to): websites, file sharing sites, torrent sites, cloud-based
storage sites and live chat sites, where such online resources may pose a risk to the
integrity of the assessment. The advertising of any services that promote academic
misconduct is in violation of this policy. The University may choose to remove any
physical advertising for services on campus that it believes expose students to the
risk of contract cheating. The University reserves the right to report any such matters
to third parties including QQI and An Garda Síochána.
5.4.2 The University will provide Examination and Assessment Regulations, which promote
the prevention of academic misconduct.
5.4.3 A declaration of academic integrity will be completed for all assignments
and examinations by students.
5.4.4 Academic staff will prioritise the development of rigorous and robust assessment
design to ensure academic integrity is maintained and upheld.
5.4.5 Programme design and delivery will ensure that academic integrity is embedded in the
programme throughout the student life cycle.

10

5.5

Level of proof

The level of proof is “on the balance of probabilities” (i.e., whether it is more likely than not
that the action or event occurred).
5.6

Types of Academic Misconduct

Academic misconduct can be either intentional or inadvertent. As outlined in the NAIN
Academic Integrity Guidelines, it can be committed in a variety of ways (including, but not
limited to, to the following):

5.6.1 Submitting work as one’s own for assessment, which has, in fact, been done in whole
or in part by someone else or submitting work which has been created artificially, e.g.,
by a machine or through artificial intelligence. This may be work completed for a
learner by a peer, family member or friend or which has been produced, commercially
or otherwise, by a third party for a fee (contracted); it may be work in which the
learner has included unreferenced material taken from another source(s) (plagiarism);
it may be use of a ghost writer to carry out assessed work which is then submitted as
the learner’s own work; it may be using a previous assignment as submitted by a peer
claiming it to be your work; it may be that references have been falsified to give
credibility to the assignment and to show evidence of research; it may be a claim for
authorship which is false;
5.6.2 Collusion;
5.6.3 Contract cheating;
5.6.4 Selling or simply providing previously completed assignments to other learners;
5.6.5 Misrepresenting research including, but not limited to, fabrication of data,
falsification of data and plagiarism 2;
5.6.6 Bribery, i.e., the offering, promising, giving, accepting or soliciting of an advantage as
an inducement for an action;
5.6.7 Falsification of documents;
5.6.8 Improper use of technology, laboratories, or other equipment;
5.6.9 Helping a peer to do their assignment which develops into the helper doing some or
all of the assignment;
5.6.10 Sharing or selling staff or institutional intellectual property (IP) with third parties
without permission;

2

MTU (2023). Research Integrity Policy.

11

5.6.11 Cheating in exams
5.6.12 Breaching, or attempting to breach examination regulations or assessment
rules;
5.6.13 Self-plagiarism
5.6.14 Unauthorised use of Generative Artificial Intelligence. That may include, but is not
limited to:
•
•

5.7

The use of Generative Artificial Intelligence that does not comply with
assignment instructions;
The use of Generative Artificial Intelligence to generate text, materials
or other outputs presented by the student as the student’s own work.

Academic Misconduct Register (AMR)

When students have been found to have engaged in academic misconduct, as part of the
process outlined in this policy their name is entered on the Academic Misconduct Register.
The Academic Misconduct Register will be managed by the Office of Vice President Academic
Affairs & Registrar.
5.8

Academic Integrity Officer (AIO)

The Academic Integrity Officer is a central university role responsible for educating staff and
students on academic integrity and supporting all relevant parties in dealing with alleged
cases of academic misconduct. The AIO will be an ex-officio member on the University
Academic Misconduct Board.
5.9

Academic Integrity Advisor (AIA)

Each faculty will appoint at least one Academic Integrity Advisor, who is a member of
academic staff. The main role of Academic Integrity Advisor is to provide advice to those
teaching in their faculty on academic integrity matters, assist academic staff in dealing with
alleged academic misconduct and support the Academic Integrity Officer.

5.10

University Academic Misconduct Board (UAMB)

The University Academic Misconduct Board (UAMB) is appointed by the Academic Council to
investigate and adjudicate on allegations of academic misconduct. Its term of office is three
years. When a case of academic misconduct is considered to be of a serious nature, such a
case will be referred for formal inquiry to the UAMB by the relevant Head of Department in
consultation with the relevant member of academic staff and/or the AIO and the AIA.

12

5.11

Outline of the Academic Misconduct Procedure
5.4.1 Stage 1a - Initial Consideration by Department
5.4.2 Stage 1b - Departmental Review
5.4.3 Stage 2 - Formal Hearing by University Academic Misconduct Board (UAMB)

At each stage of the procedure, the student will be informed of the allegations and offered
an opportunity to respond within a defined time frame.
If the student is already on the Academic Misconduct Register or if the alleged misconduct is
deemed to be a Level 2 or a Level 3 violation, the case will be referred to the University
Academic Misconduct Board (UAMB) and it will be dealt with as per the associated procedure.
The student may bring a student colleague of their choice or a sabbatical officer of the
Students’ Union to any meeting held under this policy and associated procedure. However,
the student may not bring any other person to the meeting, whether connected or
unconnected with MTU. Additional considerations may apply to a student under 18 and they
may be accompanied by a parent or guardian at any meetings they choose to attend.

6.

Appeal

A student may appeal a Stage 1b decision to the UAMB within the prescribed timeframe. If
UAMB determines that valid grounds have been demonstrated, it will refer the matter back
to DRP for final decision.
A student may appeal a Stage 2 decision of the UAMB by initiating an appeal to the
President within the prescribed timeframe.
An appeal of any decision under this policy may only be made on the following grounds:
1. New evidence: the student has new information directly relevant to the decision,
which for good reason was not available to the DRP/UAMB; or
2. Procedural error: the student can show that there was a material procedural error,
which has impacted the decision of the DRP/UAMB.

13

7.

Compliance

Responsibility for overseeing and enforcing compliance with this policy rests with the Vice
President Academic Affairs & Registrar. The Registrar will ensure that the necessary
regulations, procedures, and processes are in place and that they are implemented in
accordance with this policy. In addition, the necessary compliance checks and reviews will be
carried out periodically and at a minimum once per academic year.
A breach of some of the provisions of this policy by a student may render them subject to
disciplinary action under the Student Disciplinary Procedure. All such breaches will be dealt
with in accordance with the Student Disciplinary Policy and Procedure.

14

Document Control
A. Document Details
Title:

Academic Integrity Policy

Owner(s):

MTU Vice President Academic Affairs & Registrar

Author(s):

Regulations, Quality Assurance and Enhancement Committee

Version Number:

3.0

Status:

Approved

Effective Date:

17 June 2026

Review Date:

17 June 2031
☒ Public ☐ Restricted/Internal Use

Data Classification:

☐ Confidential/Strictly Confidential
Note: If the ‘Status’ of this document reads ‘Draft’, it has not been finalised and should not be
relied upon. An existing approved policy is deemed relevant until such time as an updated
policy has been approved by the relevant approval authority and becomes the new binding
policy.

B. Revision History
Version Revision
Summary of Changes
Changes tracked? Proposed
Number Date
Revision Date
1.0 31/05/2023 Approved by Academic Council
Yes
31/05/2026
1.1 07/03/2025 Approved by Regs., QAE Committee
Yes
2.0 21/03/2025 Approved by Academic Council
Yes
01/09/2030
2.1 19/05/2026 Amendments proposed by UAMB
Yes
submitted to Regs., QAE Committee
for review and approval
2.2 02/06/2026 Proposed amendments reviewed
Yes
and draft updated by Regs., QAE
Committee. Submitted to
Academic Council for approval.
3.0 17/06/2026 Approved by Academic Council
Yes
17/06/2031

C. Relevant/Related Existing Internal/External Documents
Note: Any existing approved documents that require referencing must be listed above.

D. Consultation History
This document has been prepared in consultation with the following bodies:
Internal consultations with relevant stakeholders.

15

E. Approvals
This document requires following approvals (in order where applicable):
Name
Date
Details of Approval Required
Academic Council
31/05/2023
Version 1.0
Academic Council
21/03/2025
Version 2.0
Academic Council
17/06/2026
Version 3.0

F. Responsible for Communication and Implementation
Manager/Functional Area responsible for communication and implementation:
Title
Functional Area
Date Implemented
Vice President Academic Academic Affairs
17/06/26
Affairs & Registrar

16
