Michigan Tech Syllabus Guidance | Academic Affairs
 Skip to page content
 Skip to footer navigation
Academic Affairs
Academic Affairs
Artificial Intelligence at Michigan Tech
Resources for Faculty and Staff
Michigan Tech Syllabus Guidance
 Also in this section
Michigan Tech Syllabus Guidance
The AI Working Group at Michigan Technological University has developed the following
 syllabus templates to guide instructors in establishing generative artificial intelligence
 (GAI) use policies within their courses. These templates, categorized into three tiers—General
 Permission, Conditional Permission, and Prohibition—are adaptable based on individual
 course requirements. The following syllabus templates draw upon the best practices
 from peer institutions[1] and other institutions[2] in conjunction with the expressed needs of faculty, staff, and students at Michigan
 Tech.
Instructors are advised to regularly consult the MTU Academic Integrity Policy, Research Integrity Policies, and the Provost's AI Resources for Faculty and Staff page to stay informed about the latest AI tools and policy updates.
The work group encourages the use of these templates to be paired with class discussions
 or lessons on AI literacy, and resources to guide instructors in facilitating those
 conversations can be found here.
General Permission Template
In recognition of the increasing integration of generative artificial intelligence
 (GAI) tools like ChatGPT in various professions, the instructor expects that students
 will incorporate these technologies into their classwork as appropriate, and the instructor
 will treat the work students produce as a demonstration of their abilities to engage
 with these new tools. The use of GAI tools is permitted with the understanding that
 their use should be accompanied by critical thinking and reflection. Responsibility
 for the work's integrity remains with the student, including any inaccuracies stemming
 from AI use.
Transparency in AI tool usage is mandatory, and instructors reserve the right to ask
 students to explain their process for creating work at any time. This includes but
 is not limited to including prompt appendices, AI-generated outputs, and reflective
 analyses.
Students in this course are expected to use [citation style], and additional resources
 for citing AI within this style can be found at [style guide][3]. AND/OR Students in this course typically submit [manuscripts/proposals] to [journals/funding
 agencies] and being aware of their policies is important before beginning work. Their
 policies on the use of GAI can be found [here][4].
GAI is changing rapidly, and new tools will become available. Course policies therefore
 are provisional and subject to change. Students should consult the instructor if they
 have any questions about the permissible use of technology in this class.
Conditional Permission Template
The use of generative artificial intelligence (GAI) tools may be permitted or recommended
 for specific assignments in this course. Those assignments that allow or call for
 GAI use will be expressly listed as such and require proper citation and documentation
 according to [citation style] [3] AND/OR [journal or funding agency guide][4]. When the instructor grants express permission for GAI tool use, it is with the understanding
 that its use should be accompanied by critical thinking and reflection. Responsibility
 for the work's integrity remains with the student, including any inaccuracies stemming
 from GAI use. The use of AI for assistance in completing other coursework is prohibited
 and constitutes cheating.
Transparency in AI tool usage is mandatory, and instructors reserve the right to ask
 students to explain their process for creating work at any time. This includes but
 is not limited to including prompt appendices, AI-generated outputs, and reflective
 analyses.
GAI is changing rapidly, and new tools will become available. Course policies therefore
 are provisional and subject to change. Students should consult the instructor if they
 have any questions about the permissible use of technology in this class.
Prohibition Template
The use of generative artificial intelligence (GAI) tools and apps (e.g. ChatGPT,
 Claude, Gemini, Dall-e, etc.) is strictly prohibited in all coursework. The use of
 GAI in this course will be considered the use of an unauthorized aide, which is a
 form of cheating. Course instructors reserve the right to ask students to explain their process for
 creating their work at any time.
GAI is changing rapidly, and new tools will become available. Course policies therefore
 are provisional and subject to change. Students should consult the instructor if they
 have any questions about the permissible use of technology in this class.
HU 3015 AI and Writing Policy
Students are permitted to use AI tools such as ChatGPT for assistance with homework,
 labs, reports, and study materials. However, it is required that any significant assistance
 received from such tools be properly attributed in the submitted work. This is to
 maintain academic integrity and transparency in the learning process. For Example:
"In completing this assignment, I utilized [AI Tool Name] to assist with [specific
 aspect, e.g., generating ideas, understanding concepts, outlining the report]."
Please make sure to appropriately cite any authorized resources used on assignments.
 You should refrain from using artificial intelligence (AI) to generate text or responses
 to graded assignments unless permitted in the assignment instructions.
The full HU3015 AI and Writing Policy can be found here.
Open AI's Chat GPT 4 was utilized to assist in revising this document.
