Student Academic Misconduct Procedure
Effective from 1 September 2025
1. The Student Academic Misconduct Procedure (‘the Procedure’) is applicable
to all registered and partnership students and should be read in conjunction
with the Student Disciplinary Policy (‘the Policy’).
2. It sets out what you can expect if you are the subject of an Academic
Misconduct investigation.
3. For a glossary of terms and roles used within this document, see Appendix 1.
4. Where reference is made within this document to any named University role,
this also includes their appropriate nominee.
5. Nothing in this policy should be read as undermining or conflicting with the
University’s Code of Practice for Freedom of Speech. In the case of any conflict,
particular regard must be given to the Free Speech Code of Practice.

Introduction
6. Newcastle University has a Student Charter which sets out the University’s
expectations for the standards of conduct of its students. These academic
values are essential to the integrity of an academic community, and you are
expected to:
•
•

•

•

Maintain high standards of academic conduct and honesty;
Familiarise yourself with and apply the guidance provided on good
academic practice, including the avoidance of plagiarism and other
academic misconduct (for example, the purchasing or inclusion of
unacknowledged content);
Ensure that your submitted work is your own and that you acknowledge
appropriately any use made of the work from other sources (as
recommended on the ASK webpage);
Abide by the Exam Rules and Guidance.

7. University disciplinary investigations use the civil standard of proof. This
means that during any University investigation, the authorised person making
the determination will need to assess the evidence available to them and
make a reasoned judgement as to whether, on the balance of probabilities,
Academic Misconduct has taken place.
1

8. The University is duty-bound to investigate any allegation of Academic
Misconduct made against a student and will take disciplinary action where it
decides, on the balance of probabilities, that Academic Misconduct has taken
place.

Support and Guidance
9. We understand that being involved in an investigation into Academic
Misconduct can be a stressful experience. You may find it helpful to seek
support and advice via the following services:
•
•
•

Student Health and Wellbeing Service
Registry and Education Services
Support & Advice Hub

10. If you are required to attend any meetings throughout this process, you may
choose to be accompanied by a friend or supporter. Please see the guidance
on the role of a friend or supporter. We strongly encourage you to access this
support.
11. If you are disabled or have a specific support need, you are encouraged to
disclose this at the start of any investigation; the University will then discuss
with you whether any adjustments or arrangements are appropriate to enable
you to engage with the process.

Academic Misconduct Procedure
See Fig. 1 for a flow chart of this procedure.

12. There are three levels at which Academic Misconduct decisions may be
considered:
•

Level 1: Local Resolution: Reports of academic misconduct are considered

locally in the first instance. The Chair of the Board of Examiners for your
programme of study (or their nominee) will investigate the reported
Academic Misconduct and decide on appropriate action.
•

Level 2: Formal Investigation: Where a Level 1 investigation has taken place

and the reported Academic Misconduct is considered to be more
significant, your case may be referred to the Student Progress Service for
a formal investigation to take place. This is likely to be the case if the
reported Academic Misconduct is considered to be major, happened in an
examination room, where there have been repeated incidents, or where it
is felt that you have not engaged with or been honest during the Level 1
investigation. A Case Officer will be appointed to investigate the case and
the outcome will be determined by the Academic Registrar after
consideration of all the available evidence.

2

•

Level 3: Student Disciplinary Committee: Where the Academic Registrar

determines that the reported Academic Misconduct is sufficiently complex
or major, your case will be referred to a Student Disciplinary Committee for
further consideration and determination of an appropriate outcome.

A: At all levels of the procedure:
13. You will be informed in writing of any suspected Academic Misconduct and
will be provided with a copy of the affected document(s).
14. The Academic Misconduct procedure has two aspects: academic and
disciplinary. Where it is determined that, on the balance of probabilities,
Academic Misconduct has occurred, there will usually be both an academic
and disciplinary sanction imposed.
15. Notes will be taken of any meetings you are asked to attend; these are not
word for word and meetings will not normally be recorded. You will be
provided with a copy of the notes of any meetings you attend, except for
formal hearings, the notes of which will be provided on request.
16. You are expected to respond to the details of the report, engage with the
investigation and be present (in person or virtually) at any interview or hearing
to which you are invited. However, if you fail to engage or attend, the
University may proceed in your absence.
17. If your programme of study leads to professional registration and Academic
Misconduct is found to have occurred, you may also be investigated under
the Fitness to Practise procedure.
18. If you withdraw from the University while the investigation into Academic
Misconduct is still ongoing, the case may be concluded in your absence.
19. If you choose to suspend your studies while the investigation is still ongoing,
the case may be put on hold until you return.
20. The content of the work reported as Academic Misconduct may be submitted
to a checking tool, for example where the report relates to plagiarism or to
text generated by Artificial Intelligence.
21. Where relevant, your understanding of the assessed subject matter and/or
your engagement with your programme of study may be taken into account
when Academic Misconduct is reported and investigated.
22. If the reported Academic Misconduct relates to a degree that has already
been awarded, please read the Procedure for Revocation of a Degree or other
Distinction conferred by the University, which explains what happens in such
cases.

3

B: Level 1: Local Resolution
23. Most reports of minor Academic Misconduct are considered and determined
by the Chair of the Board of Examiners (or nominee) for your programme of
study.
24. The Chair or nominee will notify you of the reported Academic Misconduct in
writing and will provide you with relevant evidence. They will invite you to
provide a written statement in response to the report made against you and
may also invite you to an interview to discuss the reported Academic
Misconduct, which may involve consideration of your engagement with your
studies and/or understanding of the work you have submitted.
25. The Chair will consider all the evidence available to them and decide on an
appropriate outcome, which may include academic and disciplinary sanctions
being imposed on you if misconduct is found.
26. You will be informed, in writing, of the outcome of your case and will be given
details of how to appeal any decisions you are dissatisfied with.
27. Under some circumstances, the Chair may decide it is more appropriate for
your case to be referred to Level 2 of this procedure. These circumstances
include where:
•
•
•

The reported irregularity is believed to be major/academically significant
or complex;
The case involves repeated or persistent Academic Misconduct;
It is determined that you have wilfully intended to deceive the examiner,
not been honest during or engaged fully with the Level 1 investigation.

C: Level 2: Formal Investigation
28. If your case is being investigated under Level 2 of this procedure, a Case
Officer will be appointed to investigate the reported misconduct. If this took
place within an Examination Room, an Examinations Officer will usually carry
out the investigation.
29. You will be provided with relevant evidence and invited to submit a written
statement in response to the reported Academic Misconduct. It is also likely
that you will be invited to attend an interview as part of this process. During
this interview, you will be given the opportunity to provide your version of
events, provide clarification, and present any mitigating circumstances that
you wish to be considered.
30. The collated details of the case will be considered by the Academic Registrar
and you will be informed in writing whether misconduct has been found,
along with any relevant academic or disciplinary sanctions imposed on you.
You will also be given details of how to appeal any decisions you are
dissatisfied with.
4

31. Where the Academic Registrar determines that the reported Academic
Misconduct requires further is sufficiently major, academically significant or
complex, your case may be referred to a Student Disciplinary Committee to
be considered under Level 3 of this procedure.

D: Level 3: Student Disciplinary Committee
32. More complex, major and/or academically significant Academic Misconduct
cases may be referred to a Student Disciplinary Committee for further
investigation. The Student Disciplinary Committee will hold a hearing to
consider the evidence. You will be asked to attend the hearing to answer
questions and respond to the evidence presented.
33. You will normally be informed in writing within 5 working days of your Level 2
interview and/or receipt of a statement if your case is to be heard by a
Disciplinary Committee. You will be notified in writing of the members of the
Student Disciplinary Committee and documentation to be presented. If you
have any concerns about the impartiality of any member of the Student
Disciplinary Committee, you may write to the Director of Registry and
Education Services within 5 working days to request a review of the
Committee membership by the Disciplinary Convenor. If you require any
reasonable adjustments to be made to enable you to engage with the
Disciplinary hearing, please submit your request in writing to be considered
by the Chair of the Committee.
34. A representative from your School may be invites to attend the Student
Disciplinary Committee hearing in order to advise the Committee on issues
relating to the academic subject or specific assessment(s). The School
representative will not play any part in the decision-making process.
35. After considering all available evidence, the Student Disciplinary Committee
will determine an appropriate outcome, which may include sanctions.
Appendix 2 provides a defined list of academic and disciplinary sanctions
appropriate at this level.
36. You will be informed of the outcome in writing after the hearing and will be
issued with a letter stating the full reasons for the decision within 10 working
days. You will also be given details of how to appeal any decisions you are
dissatisfied with.

E: Student Disciplinary Appeals
37. You have the right to appeal against any decision or sanction imposed on you.
38. You should carefully consider your reasons for appeal so that you can explain
why you are appealing. Your reasons should include at least one of the
following:
•

New material evidence is available that was not previously reasonably
available;
5

•
•
•
•

Procedural irregularity (i.e. you feel that this procedure was not
correctly followed);
Bias or prejudice (i.e. you feel that the investigation was prejudged or
unfair in some way);
Excessive or inappropriate sanction (i.e. you believe that the sanction
imposed on you is not proportionate to the determined irregularity);
The decision was one that no reasonable person/committee could
have reached on the evidence available.

39. Appeal requests must be submitted in writing to casework@ncl.ac.uk within
21 calendar days of the date of either the Outcome letter (for Level 1 or 2
cases) or the Statement of Reasons (for Level 3 cases).
40. The University Disciplinary Convenor will review your case and decide
whether or not your appeal meets the grounds to be admitted. If the
Disciplinary Convenor agrees that there are grounds for appeal, the appeal
will be considered as follows:
•

•

Level 1 or 2 cases: The Disciplinary Convenor will appoint a member of
the Disciplinary Panel who was not involved with the original case to
consider your appeal. They may call a Disciplinary Appeal Committee
hearing if they believe this would give more appropriate consideration to
the case.
Level 3 cases: The appeal will be considered by a Disciplinary Appeal
Committee and you will be invited to attend an appeal hearing. The
Disciplinary Convenor will decide whether a full re-hearing is required or
only a reconsideration of the sanction.

41. If the Disciplinary Convenor determines that there are no grounds to your
appeal, the appeal request will be dismissed.
42. When a Level 1 or 2 case appeal is considered by a Disciplinary Panel
member, or when a Level 3 case appeal is considered by a Disciplinary
Appeal Committee, the outcome of the appeal may confirm, change or
remove the original disciplinary outcome: if a Disciplinary Appeal Committee
is only required to reconsider sanctions, the outcome of the appeal may only
confirm or change the original sanctions.
43. When an appeal hearing is convened, the arrangements will be as for a
Student Disciplinary Committee hearing, except that the Disciplinary Panel
member or Disciplinary Appeal Committee members will not have been
involved with any earlier considerations.
44. The decision of the Disciplinary Convenor, Disciplinary Panel member or
Disciplinary Appeal Committee is final. At that point the procedures of the
University will be exhausted and you will be issued with a Completion of
Procedures letter.
6

External Ombudsman
45. The Office of the Independent Adjudicator for Higher Education (OIA) runs an
independent scheme to review student complaints. The University subscribes
to this scheme. Where all of the University procedures relating to your
Academic Misconduct have been completed and you remain dissatisfied with
the outcome offered by the University, you can seek an external review by
submitting a complaint via the OIA website.
46. Complaints must be submitted to the OIA within 12 months of the date of the
Completion of Procedures letter.

Confidentiality
See also: Student Disciplinary Policy

47. The Academic Misconduct Procedure is an internal and confidential process.
It is important that you, and any friend or support you choose to accompany
you to meetings, respect this confidentiality and treat all information as
confidential. Where confidentiality is breached, this may be treated as an act
of misconduct under the Student Disciplinary Procedure.

Related Documents
•
•
•

Student Disciplinary Policy
The University’s Code of Practice for Research Degree Programmes
Fitness to Practise Procedure

7

Fig. 1: The Academic Misconduct Procedure

Level 1
Suspected Academic Misconduct investigated by Chair of Board of
Examiners (or nominee).
Student informed in writing, provided with copy of affected assessment, and
given opportunity to respond.
Chair of Board of Examiners considers all evidence and may determine:

•

That misconduct is not found and no further action will be taken
That minor misconduct is found and an appropriate Level 1 sanction is
given
That there is sufficient evidence of more major misconduct to refer to
Registry and Education Services for a Level 2 investigation

Level 2
Suspected Academic Misconduct investigated by Case Officer (Registry and
Education Services)
Student informed in writing, provided with copy of affected assessment, and
given opportunity to respond, including the option to attend a meeting.
Academic Registrar (or nominee) considers all evidence and may determine:
•
•
•

That misconduct is not found and no further action will be taken
That misconduct is found and an appropriate Level 2 sanction is given
That there is sufficient evidence of more major, complex or repeated
misconduct and the case should be referred to a Level 3 Student
Disciplinary Committee.

Student informed of right to appeal

•
•

Level 3
Level 3 Student Disciplinary Committee arranged, in accordance with the
Operational Guidance for Student Committee Hearings.
Student invited to attend to answer questions relating to the reported
misconduct.
Student Disciplinary Committee considers all evidence and may determine:
•
•

That misconduct is not found and no further action will be taken
That misconduct is found and an appropriate sanction is given.

8

Appendix 1: Terminology
Roles
Academic Registrar: the senior University employee with overall responsibility
for ensuring a proper outcome of a disciplinary investigation.
Authorised Person/Case Officer: an employee of the University who is
authorised to undertake disciplinary investigations. This is usually the Chair
of the Board of Examiners (Level 1), and a member of the Student Progress
Service (Casework team/Examinations Office) (Level 2). The Authorised
Person can nominate another senior colleague with appropriate
knowledge of the Academic Misconduct procedure to act on their behalf.
Chair of the Board of Examiners: an academic employee of the University,
responsible for overseeing assessment and award process within a
specific programme of study. The Chair of the Board of Examiners is
responsible for undertaking and determining Level 1 Academic
Misconduct investigations.
PGR Panel: For postgraduate research degree programmes, both the Project
Approval Panel and the Annual Review Progress Panel are deemed to be
equivalent to the Board of Examiners for taught programmes.
Registry and Education Services: the University service with responsibility for
the operation of the Disciplinary Process which includes formal Academic
Misconduct investigations.
Student Disciplinary Committee: a Committee made up of three impartial senior
university employees whose role is to assess evidence presented to them
and decide on an outcome and any related sanctions. Members of Student
Disciplinary Committees undergo extensive training on numerous topics
relating to disciplinary cases.
Student Disciplinary Appeal Committee: a Committee made up of two impartial
senior university employees who were not involved in the original
investigation and a Students’ Union Sabbatical Officer, whose role is to
assess an appeal against a Disciplinary decision or sanction.
Student Responder: The student who is the subject of an investigation into the
reported misconduct (including Academic Misconduct).
University Disciplinary Convenor: A senior academic employee of the University
appointed by the University Education Committee to convene Student
Disciplinary and Disciplinary Appeal Committee hearings. The Disciplinary
Convenor may nominate a deputy, drawn from the University Disciplinary
Panel, to act on their behalf.

9

University Disciplinary Panel: A panel of appropriately trained senior University
employees, appointed by the University’s Education Committee to
undertake investigations into reports of student misconduct.

Outcomes and sanctions
A sanction is a penalty imposed on a student when it has been determined that
there has been academic or behavioural misconduct.
See Appendix 2 for a list of examples of misconduct outcomes and their likely
sanctions.
No Further Action: it is determined that Academic Misconduct has not taken
place.
Advice and Guidance: There is insufficient evidence available for the University
to determine that misconduct has occurred or the misconduct is deemed
to be low or related to poor academic practice. You will be provided with
direction on how to improve your academic practice within assessments.
No further action will be taken against you on this occasion, unless further
evidence is made available to the University. No record will be kept on
your University file of the disciplinary investigation or its outcome. This
outcome is possible at any level of the procedure.
Misconduct Noted on Record: There is sufficient evidence for a finding of minor
misconduct and the level of misconduct is deemed to be low. A note of
the finding of misconduct and will be recorded on your University file and
may be reported if a further instance of academic misconduct is found to
have occurred. This will not normally need to be disclosed in references.
This outcome is possible at any level of the procedure.
Warning: There is sufficient evidence for a finding of misconduct and the level of
misconduct is deemed to be moderate. A written warning will be issued to
you. A record of the finding of misconduct and the warning will be kept on
your University file. It is for any referee to decide whether to disclose this
outcome in references. This outcome is possible at any level of the
procedure.
Final Warning: There is sufficient evidence for a finding of misconduct and the
level of misconduct is deemed to be serious. A final warning will be issued
to you. A record of the finding of misconduct and the final warning will be
kept on your University file. It is for any referee to decide whether to
disclose this outcome in references. If further similar misconduct is found,
it is likely that you will be referred to a Student Disciplinary Committee for
further consideration. This outcome is possible at Level 2 and 3 of the
procedure.

10

Suspension: There is sufficient evidence for a finding of misconduct and the
level of misconduct is deemed to be very serious. You will be suspended
from the University for a defined period of time (usually up to one
academic year) and will not be allowed on campus during this time. This
will be recorded on your University file and will usually be disclosed in
references. This outcome is possible at Level 3 of the procedure only.
Deferred Expulsion: There is sufficient evidence for a finding of misconduct and
the level of misconduct is deemed to be very serious. A Student
Disciplinary Committee has decided that an expulsion would be an
appropriate sanction but has agreed to postpone that sanction to allow
you the opportunity to change your behaviour. If further similar
misconduct is found, it is likely that you will be re-referred to a Student
Disciplinary Committee to decide whether an immediate expulsion is
appropriate. This will be noted on your University file and will usually be
disclosed in references. This outcome is possible at Level 3 of the
procedure only.
Expulsion with Immediate Effect: There is sufficient evidence for a finding of
significant or repeated misconduct and the level of misconduct is deemed
to be very serious. Your studies will be terminated with immediate effect.
You may or may not be entitled to an exit award. This will be recorded on
your University file and will usually be disclosed in references. This
outcome is possible at Level 3 of the procedure only.

Types of Academic Misconduct
Breach of ethical governance: any academic practice which goes against ethical
guidelines for student research at any level.
Breach of University examination rules: this includes copying from/conferring
with other students; being in possession of/using unauthorised materials
or equipment in an examination room; causing disruption in an examination
(such as by leaving a mobile phone switched on); being in possession
of/using a mobile phone/smart watch during an exam; notes within a
dictionary or other object.
Collusion: Working with other students to produce a piece of work that you
submit for individual assessment. This can happen in take home exams or
for assignment submissions. Collusion can include allowing another
student to copy your assessed work or providing opportunity for them to
do so. Some levels of proof reading may also be considered collusion.
Contract cheating (sometimes known as ‘custom essay writing’): Purchasing or
attempting to purchase assessed work created by another person which
11

you then submit as your own work. It is also an offence to supply your own
work to another student or a third-party, regardless of whether or not you
receive payment.
Dishonesty: any attempt to deceive the examiners that the work presented is
your own work and any irregularity detected prior to the work being
submitted for marking.
Falsification of documentation: this includes, for example, falsifying - by
inclusion or suppression - any documentation relating to your previous
qualifications or (for International students) your English Language
assessments.
Falsification of research results: this includes falsifying results by inclusion or
suppression.
Plagiarism: the unacknowledged use of ideas or works from another source,
presented as your own, without specific acknowledgement. Plagiarism can
occur in an examination script as well as in assessed coursework. This may
also involve the use of electronic materials and the use of material
generated through use of artificial intelligence (unless previously
approved e.g. as a reasonable adjustment for a disability etc.). The
inclusion of a source in a bibliography is not always sufficient to avoid
plagiarism if the source is not specifically acknowledged within the text of
the assessment.
Self-plagiarism (sometimes known as ‘auto-plagiarism’): this is when you
submit work that you have already submitted (in part or in whole) for
another assessment at Newcastle or elsewhere. It may be considered as
an attempt to gain multiple credit for the same piece of work. This does
not apply to draft copies of research work.
Use of Artificial Intelligence (AI): Unacknowledged inclusion of content,
including text and images, generated by artificial intelligence tools or other
knowledge based systems to create the response to an assessment
submitted as your own work.

A note on minor/major Academic Misconduct
There is no firm definition of what constitutes ‘minor’ or ‘major’ Academic

Misconduct, as it depends on lots of factors, including:
•
•
•
•

The proportion of the submitted work affected;

Whether this is your first offence of Academic Misconduct;
Whether the Academic Registrar believes there was an intention to
deceive the examiners;
Whether you have displayed dishonesty during the course of the
investigation;
12

•
•

Whether the work was academically significant to the programme or for a
higher level award;
Any mitigating circumstances.

13

Appendix 2: Examples of misconduct and likely sanctions
Level of
Academic Misconduct Type
procedure

Level 1

Poor academic practice (for example, not referencing
correctly)

Indicative
Indicative academic sanctions
disciplinary
actions/sanctions
Advice and
Guidance only

Any minor breach of the University Exam Rules, such as:
-

Not following invigilator instructions
Being in possession of or using unauthorised
calculators/dictionaries
Causing disruption during an exam (for example,
by leaving a mobile phone switched on)
Opening an exam paper or starting to write before
the start of an exam
Continuing to write after the exam has ended.

Any minor Academic Misconduct reported for submitted
coursework, such as:
-

-

-

Academic
Misconduct Noted
on File

Warning

A reduced mark, which is based only on the
work unaffected by Academic Misconduct
(this may be zero)
The need to resubmit the assessment (or an
alternative assessment) by a specific
deadline.
The need to resubmit a project proposal or
progress report by a specific deadline
(Postgraduate Research Students only)
The need to make minor changes to
research data or thesis submitted for
examination (Postgraduate Research
Students only)

Allowing another student to copy any assessed
coursework (even if it was not the intention that
the work be copied)
Sharing assessed coursework online via a website
or any other medium, other than for a genuine
academic reason
The falsification of research results (including the
suppression of data)
14

-

-

-

Plagiarism or unacknowledged use of another
source
Self-plagiarism (for example, by submitting the
same or parts of the same work for multiple
assessments)
Collusion without permission
Buying or attempting to buy assessed work
created by another person
Unacknowledged inclusion of content (including
text and images) generated by artificial
intelligence (AI) tools or other knowledge-based
systems
Dishonesty (including attempted Academic
Misconduct detected before the submission of
work)

Any minor breach of research ethics.
Level 2

Any more major breaches of the University Exam Rules,
such as:
-

-

Talking to or conferring with another student
Copying from another student
Being in possession of or using unauthorised
materials in an exam room (this includes mobile
phones, smart watches, unauthorised notes, or
unauthorised exam scripts)
Impersonating another student or allowing
another student to impersonate you (for example
by sitting an exam for them, or allowing someone
to sit an exam for you)

Any of the above
or:

Any of the above or:

Final warning

A mark of zero for one or more modules,
which will remain zero for the calculation of
stage averages and degree classification
even after resits

Referral to a Level
3 Student
Disciplinary
Committee for

A mark of zero for one or more modules,
with the ability to resit

The need to resubmit the assessment (or an
alternative assessment) by a specific
deadline but must be passed to progress on
the programme.
15

Any more major Academic Misconduct reported for
submitted coursework including, but not limited to
-

-

-

-

-

Allowing another student to copy any assessed
coursework (even if it was not the intention that
the work be copied)
Sharing assessed coursework online, other than
for a genuine academic reason.
The falsification of research results (including the
suppression of data).
Plagiarism or unacknowledged use of another
source
Self-plagiarism (for example, by submitting the
same or parts of the same work for multiple
assessments)
Collusion without permission
Buying or attempting to buy assessed work
created by another person
Unacknowledged inclusion of content, including
text and images, generated by artificial
intelligence (AI) tools or other knowledge-based
systems
Dishonesty (including attempted Academic
Misconduct detected before the submission of
work)
Repeated or persistent instances of any of the
above already considered under Level 1 of this
procedure

further
consideration

A requirement to resubmit the thesis, in
accordance with research degree
conventions

Any more major breach of research ethics

16

Level 3

Any of the above where the case is believed to be
complex, sufficiently serious, or academically significant
to warrant further impartial consideration, or where there
are repeated instances of Academic Misconduct.

Any of the above
or:
Suspension from
studies
Deferred
Expulsion
Expulsion with
immediate effect
(with exit award)
Expulsion with
immediate effect
(without exit
award)

Any of the above or:

Being deemed to fail the whole academic
year and required to pass the module or
stage before being allowed to proceed to
the next stage

Being deemed to fail the whole programme
and not being allowed to be considered by a
Board of Examiners

Any other academic sanction considered
appropriate to the circumstances of the
case.

17
