NORTHERN IRELAND’S

Artificial
Intelligence
Strategy
Positive Use
Positive Inclusion
Positive Outcomes

Consultation Report
August 2026

NORTHERN IRELAND’S

Artificial
Intelligence
Strategy
Positive Use
Positive Inclusion
Positive Outcomes
Consultation Report
August 2026

To find out more visit
consultations.nidirect.gov.uk/teo/
artificial-intelligence-public-consultation
or scan:

Contents
Executive Summary

4

1. AI Explained

6

2. The AI Landscape in Northern Ireland

10-17

3. The AI Principles for Northern Ireland

18-27

4. AI Governance

28-29

5. AI and Infrastructure

30-31

6. AI and Skills

32-35

7. AI and Public Sector Transformation

36-37

8. AI and Citizens

38-40

Conclusion

41

Appendix 1: Summary Actions

42

References

43-46

Northern Ireland’s Artificial Intelligence Strategy Consultation Report 2026 3

Executive
Summary
Northern Ireland’s Public Sector AI Strategy is grounded in the premise
that, with responsible governance and safeguards, Artificial Intelligence
can unlock significant opportunities to improve public services and
support innovation. From positive use and positive inclusion come
positive outcomes.
AI can transform our public services to
the benefit of citizens; it can revolutionise
how we work and study; it can drive economic
growth and prosperity; and it can amplify
human capability to create higher-quality jobs.
The potential is extraordinary, and we have
a duty to educate our citizens so that they
understand that potential and can use these
intelligent systems for their own benefit.

Yet Artificial Intelligence carries risk, so our
priority must also be to ensure that we have
accountable human oversight operating with
guardrails for ethical use and guidelines for
best use. This is particularly important in
the use of AI in public sector transformation
where so many of the services that impact the
lives of people every day are delivered. The
potential of AI will never be realised without
public trust.

This strategy is therefore grounded in eight key principles
that are designed to build confidence:
1.

Human Oversight

5. Fairness and Transparency

2. Accountability and Redress

6. Sustainability

3. Data Governance

7. Societal Benefit

4. Technical Safety and Security

8. Training and Literacy

4 Northern Ireland’s Artificial Intelligence Strategy Consultation Report 2026

The strategy is proudly place-based. It provides
an honest assessment of where we are on the
journey towards AI transformation across a
range of areas; it also offers recommended
actions that respond to our specific
circumstances. If we adhere to our eight
principles and work collaboratively to develop
a plan that delivers on the recommended
actions, Northern Ireland (NI) will be uniquely
positioned to become a major AI player on the
global stage. We have deep expertise across
all sectors; we have a unique ecosystem
based on connectivity and collaboration; and
we have significant potential to be a leader
in infrastructure: our natural resources could
establish us as a pioneer in green data centre
provision and, with that, a magnet for Foreign
Direct Investment.
Achieving the ambition set out in the strategy
will require us to mobilise our quadruplehelix of government, industry, academia and
citizens to co-create the plan for delivery and
put in place ongoing mechanisms to review
and renew our approach.

Purpose & Scope
Our vision is to bring together a coalition
of committed partners across Executive
Departments and Arm’s Length Bodies, who
are united in shaping a future where Artificial
Intelligence is applied consistently and
responsibly. By establishing shared principles
and priorities, this strategy supports public
bodies to make informed, ethical decisions
and to work together to deliver meaningful
outcomes for society.
The strategy does not prescribe technologies,
platforms, or digital solutions for individual
organisations; rather, it sets a clear and
ambitious direction, providing the flexibility
for each organisation to adopt the tools,
approaches and recommendations that best
suit their unique needs and those of their
users. Recommended actions are included
with each section, and an overarching set of
six Summary Actions is included in Appendix 1.
We invite industry leaders, educational and
research institutions, local government, and
voluntary and community sector partners to
join us on this journey. This is not a technical
manual or an economic blueprint; instead,
it is a call to collective action and a guiding
framework for safe, ethical, and purposedriven AI adoption which will ensure that
NI leads with integrity and ambition in an
evolving digital world.

Northern Ireland’s Artificial Intelligence Strategy Consultation Report 2026 5

1. AI Explained
To support public sector leaders in making informed, confident decisions
about the use of Artificial Intelligence, this section provides an accessible
explanation of the origins and functions of AI.
Artificial Intelligence is a ‘collision space’ of
disciplines, including Mathematics, Statistics,
Cognitive Science and Computer Science;
it also increasingly requires input from fields
such as Philosophy to develop frameworks for
ethical use, and the Creative Arts to support
end-user engagement. In simple terms,
AI encompasses a range of algorithm-based
technologies that carry out complex tasks
and solve complex problems using large
datasets and high-performance computers.
Essentially, AI systems learn patterns from
data and use those patterns to generate
outputs. In more technical terms, the OECD
AI Policy Observatory defines an AI system
as ‘a machine-based system that, for explicit
or implicit objectives, infers, from the input
it receives, how to generate outputs such as
predictions, content, recommendations,
or decisions that can influence physical or

virtual environments. Different AI systems vary
in their levels of autonomy and adaptiveness
after deployment’.1 Among its benefits, AI
enables computers and machines to ‘find
insights in datasets too large for humans to
comprehend, or to crunch more numbers than
a human could in a lifetime of calculation’.2
As these suggest, definitions are often
complex and risk raising alarm bells with their
narrative of ‘doing what humans cannot’. AI
is a rapidly evolving technology, with many
benefits for business and individuals, but it
can be misused and manipulated by malicious
actors. The central tenets of this strategy,
outlined below, identify the opportunities
of AI while being conscious of the concerns
that exist:

6 Northern Ireland’s Artificial Intelligence Strategy Consultation Report 2026

Foundational tenets underpinning this strategy

Artificial
Intelligence is not
a replacement for
human intelligence;
it is a product of it.

AI does not
replace humans; it
adds value to what
they do.

AI supports human
decision-making;
it does not render
it obsolete.

In the current wave of interest in relation to AI,
it should also be recognised that:
i. AI is already in everyday use e.g. in face
and fingerprint recognition on phones,
in online banking and social media, with
smart devices in the home, in cybersecurity
software, and for geo-spatial tracking. It
is also commonly used in health surveys
and electronic health records; and across
this spectrum, both higher and lower levels
of governance are in play: high with online
banking, for instance, and much lower with
social media.
ii. AI is not new; it can be dated back to
a 1956 conference on the potential for
computers to emulate human reasoning
held in Dartmouth University, USA, and
led by academics from Dartmouth and
Harvard Universities and by representatives
of IBM and Bell Telephone Laboratories.3
The two key concepts that emerged from
that conference (artificial neural networks
and symbolic AI) remain relevant for
our understanding of how present-day
technologies operate.

Programmers and
designers define the levels
of autonomy of AI systems;
in other words, people
prescribe what AI does
and does not do in any
given scenario.

Debate will inevitably persist on the pros and
cons of AI, but the purpose of this strategy is
not to pronounce on those debates. AI is here;
its potential for transformation of our economy,
research, education, and public services is
enormous, and NI has the opportunity to be
a global leader in this field; so our priority
must be to ensure that we have guardrails
for ethical use to mitigate risks and engender
trust, and guidelines for best use. Responsible
AI and data-driven technologies have the
potential to drive scientific and technological
innovation, improve efficiency, and enhance
decision-making. A coordinated and strategic
intersectoral approach will enable us to
avoid fragmentation, missed opportunities,
competing purposes, inefficiencies, and
governance challenges. From there, we can
realise exponential returns that build on the
existing expertise and good practice across NI.

Northern Ireland’s Artificial Intelligence Strategy Consultation Report 2026 7

Many of NI’s government Departments are
already deploying AI to improve outcomes
for our citizens in areas ranging from
healthcare and finance to infrastructure and
sustainability. Recent evaluations of its uses
have also highlighted AI’s specific scope
for RD&I in fields including drug delivery,4
radiology,5 green energy production and
management,6 and smart manufacturing.7
Work is also underway on the regulatory
front, with the Department of Justice bringing
forward legislation to criminalise the creation
and sharing of sexually explicit deepfake
images of adults. Once introduced, it will
form part of the wider framework governing
the safe and responsible use of AI in NI.
Yet in an environment where many citizens
may be curious about the opportunities but
unsure how to mobilise them with confidence
and trust, information is key. We begin
therefore with a brief overview of the different
types of AI. These are commonly categorised
by capability, functionality or output, but
for the purposes of the present explanation,
categorisation by output is prioritised as
the most direct and observable way to
understand the operations of AI. An outputfocused approach is not only more accessible
to non-experts; it also highlights impact and
value. In addition, categorisations by output
remain consistent, while functionality and

capability evolve rapidly through technological
innovation. Discussions of functionality and
capability can also be technically complex
and therefore alienating to non-experts. In
short, a focus on what AI can accomplish
rather than on how AI works should be the
remit of a user-focused strategy.
If we categorise by output, the following
types emerge:8
i. Predictive/Analytical AI analyses
data to make predictions about future
outcomes e.g. personalised content
recommendations on Netflix; detection of
fraudulent transactions by banks, inventory
management in retail, or prediction of
disease outbreaks and patient outcomes.
ii. Generative AI creates new content such
as text, images, music or video based on
training data from Large Language Models
e.g. ChatGPT; it is also used for customer
service chatbots, for optimisation of
product design in manufacturing, or for
designing new molecules in drug delivery.
iii. Autonomous/Agentic AI acts
independently to complete complex, multistep tasks e.g. self-driving cars, autonomous
drones, factory systems, smart home
devices, or precision surgical use.

8 Northern Ireland’s Artificial Intelligence Strategy Consultation Report 2026

These examples alone point to the sheer
breadth of AI forms and uses, their
fundamental integration into everyday life,
and their future potential. The recent Matrix
report on AI and the Future of Work in
Northern Ireland provides a clear-sighted and
compelling assessment of current and future
impacts, with important recommendations
centred on willingness, capability, and
capacity. Evaluations and evidence of this kind
are critical.9 In fact, the Matrix report projects
AI contributing between £0.2B and £3.7B in
incremental GVA in NI by 2030 relative to
2023, with a midpoint estimate of £1.2B.
Understanding the strengths and weaknesses
of its forms and uses across sectors and
population segments, as well as the controls
that can be embedded to counter identified
risks, is therefore the foundation of a rigorous
governance framework and a strategy for
transformation for good.

Northern Ireland’s Artificial Intelligence Strategy Consultation Report 2026 9

2. The AI
Landscape in
Northern Ireland
From a cursory glance at the landscape, one might be forgiven for
thinking that NI is lagging behind other regions, but NI’s unique
ecosystem has the potential to position it as a global leader.
England launched its AI Opportunities
Action Plan in January 2025,10 followed
by the AI Playbook in February 2025,11 the
latter designed to offer guidance to those
in government on the safe and effective use
of AI. Ireland published its AI-Here For Good
Refresh in November 2024 to take account
of the updated EU regulations on AI use, and
to provide a roadmap to unlock productivity,
respond to societal challenges, and enhance
public services delivery.12 Scotland first
launched its Artificial Intelligence Strategy:
Trustworthy, Ethical and Inclusive in March
2021,13 with the Scottish Alliance also
established in 2021 to lead on delivery of
the strategy.14 The Scottish AI Playbook was
subsequently published in January 2025
with the specific remit to provide businesses
and other organisations with guidance on
AI integration, and in March 2026, Scotland
published a new Artificial Intelligence Strategy
2026-2031.15,16 Wales published a digital
strategy in 2022 which encompassed a vision
for AI and Data Science.17 This was followed by
an overview of guidance and services on AI,
an AI Strategic Advisory Group in June 2025,
and the AI Plan for Wales was launched in
November 2025.18,19,20 In each of

these strategies, the messaging around AI
is inflected to align with the governmental,
academic, commercial and population needs
of the region. Similarly to other jurisdictions,
there is value in developing an AI Strategy
which can take into account our unique
circumstances in respect of our governance
structures, academic institutions, labour
market and industrial sectors. A place-based
approach is required, as was recognised in the
AI Strategic Direction document published by
the Department for the Economy in December
2025.21 It might also be tempting to suggest
that we are too small to be a significant player
in the AI space, but that is to elide the fact
that we have one tremendous advantage that
can make us globally competitive, and that is
our connectivity. The building blocks are in
place for a distinctive and transformational
AI Strategy, meaning we have a strong
platform from which to elevate all sectors
with additional support and new frameworks
for positive change (Figure 1).

10 Northern Ireland’s Artificial Intelligence Strategy Consultation Report 2026

2.1 Government
In February 2025, the Executive agreed the
Programme for Government 2024-2027
entitled ‘Our Plan: Doing What Matters Most’.22
Within the Programme for Government (PfG),
the Executive called for the creation of the
Northern Ireland Science & Technology
Advisory Network (NISTAN) which is now
established to share best practice and
innovation across Departments. Science
Champions are also now embedded in each
Department (DSCs) with a remit to act as the
conduit and enabler for knowledge exchange
and collaboration. The DSCs are members
of NISTAN and provide a readily accessible
network across government to leverage
R&D funding.
The PfG also identified the need for the Office
of Science & Technology (OST) which has now
been established for >1 year, and is designed
to work across all Departments to showcase
and support innovations across government,
to provide advice to ministers as and when
required, and to be the ‘docking entity’ for
external stakeholders. To date, the DSCs
have been responsible for the generation of
80 Departmental Areas of Research Interest
(ARIs) – namely challenges identified by
Departments on which they are seeking
research input from other stakeholders –
and it is of note that >75% of the projects
produced have an AI component. These
projects are now externally advertised to
foster collaboration between government,
industry and academia.23 The OST has also
produced the first integrated cross-Executive
Research and Innovation Strategy for NI
entitled ‘Integrate to Innovate’, complete
with clear actions and deliverables so that
progress can be tracked.
In June 2025, the Office of AI & Digital (OAID)
was launched by the First Minister and Deputy
First Minister with a key remit to guide the

responsible, ethical and transparent adoption of
AI across the public sector. To support the OAID,
the Government AI Network (GAIN) has been
established with an AI Champion appointed
in each government Department, to build a
community of support and best practice. The
OAID is also working alongside the Data and
Digital leaders recognising that AI, data and
digital transformation are interdependent and
must be progressed in an integrated fashion.
For example, the Northern Ireland Statistics and
Research Agency (NISRA), which is an executive
agency of the Department of Finance, is leading
on a Data Strategy designed to enable greater
sharing of information across Departments and
research entities.
However, there is work to do. A recent digital
maturity assessment has revealed that there
are a range of challenges: significant disparities
across government Departments and ALBs;
cultures of risk aversion which negatively
impact digital transformation; digital talent
gaps and shortages of skills; and a lack of
interoperable systems, which prevents datasharing and cross-cutting delivery.
The key takeaway on a government level is
that none of these transformations occurs
in isolation, but the leaders in Science
& Technology, Data, Digital and AI are all
committed to working together through a
newly appointed Transformation Delivery
Unit that is also supported by experts in
behavioural science to ensure buy-in from
end-users. This has enabled the development
of an initial 5-point plan for government
that commits to: 1) having all staff trained to
use AI in office skills; 2) providing training to
staff on basic efficiency tools; 3) all entities
having cloud-based facilities that can talk to
one another if required; 4) all entities having
documents stored in a way that enables
AI access; and 5) all entities having data
classified, labelled and stored in readiness
for more complex AI projects.

Northern Ireland’s Artificial Intelligence Strategy Consultation Report 2026 11

Progress is therefore underway across
government, with a number of enabling AI
projects already demonstrating impact across
Departments and Arm’s-Length Bodies, and
more opportunities will follow (Table 1).

The ambition is for this strategy to give
confidence to public sector bodies so that
they can advance to the next level of data,
digital and AI technologies.

Table 1. Selected Examples of AI Projects across Government Departments.
Department

Project

Benefits

DAERA

Remote Sensing Inspections

Use of satellite imagery, orthophotography
and other spatial layers to determine land
parcel features.

DAERA

Common Health Entry
Document Inspection Portal
(CHIP)

Saves 3-5 mins per 13,000 entries per year
and enables staff to focus on outliers.

DAERA

Saltmarsh Classification

Reduces time and supports plan to map our
blue carbon habitats.

DAERA

AI-Supported Imagery for
Cattle Encroachment on
River Lagan

Enables selection of priority areas for
in-stream works.

TEO

Copilot Upskilling Programme

The programme builds digital capability
by enabling staff to use Microsoft Copilot
more effectively, improving collaboration
and productivity.

DoF

Virtual Agent

Assists in answering questions from policy.

DoJ / TEO

Data Management

Ending Violence Against Women and Girls
Dashboard to track progress.

DfI

Roads Virtual Agent

Reduces time staff spend on high volumes
of customer queries and improves customer
experience.

DfI

Winter Service

Uses AI to assist decision-making for winter
gritting using multiple data sources including
sensor data.

12 Northern Ireland’s Artificial Intelligence Strategy Consultation Report 2026

2.2 Higher and Further Education
NI has 6 Regional FE Colleges across 29
locations with courses at Levels 2-5 including
Foundation Degrees, Higher National Diplomas
and Higher Level Apprenticeships (HLAs), with
top-ups to Level 6 via University partners. This
equates to 61,000 individual students each
year working across >9000 employers.24 Given
their significant reach and remit, our Further
Education Colleges have a vital role to play
in AI up-skilling. A game-changer would be
provision of foundational learning in AI skills
for all students, irrespective of the subject
of study. The NI FE sector is proactive in this
respect. However, while AI may in practice be
embedded across courses, its presence is not
prominent in a survey of marketing materials.
A search for ‘Artificial Intelligence’ indicates
a somewhat narrow association between AI
and subjects such as Computing, Business or
Finance. From this survey, therefore, it would
appear that the potential for AI to provide a
critical underpinning for courses not only in
the Sciences, but also across subjects such
as Engineering, Creative Technologies,
Languages and vocational subjects, may
as yet be unrealised.
A similar picture emerges across the Higher
Education landscape in NI. A search for
‘Artificial Intelligence’ in each of the three
Universities’ Course Finders provides a
temperature check on the prominence of
AI in existing provision. Here too, there is a
general clustering of AI with a narrow field of
disciplines, notably Business and Computer
Science-related programmes, albeit there is
some limited evidence of AI being integrated
into a wider range of disciplinary fields
of study such as English. In other words,
while there is wide evidence of curriculum
innovation in all institutions, there may be
more to do to ensure that every graduate,

regardless of discipline, is confident with the
appropriate use of AI. As outlined further
under AI and Skills, all three universities are to
be recognised and commended for providing
learning support at varying levels on how
to use AI as a study resource, but there is
scope for a more throughgoing review of
degree programmes, such as Major/Minor
combinations, that extend higher-level skills
in AI across a wider range of disciplines and
associated sectors.
In terms of the research landscape in our
universities, the picture is vibrant. A search
for Artificial Intelligence across institutional
research platforms reveals >180 academics
and >500 research outputs associated with
this field. NI therefore has the intellectual
resource to be at the leading edge of AI
developments, and other sectors should be
encouraged and enabled to connect in with
this expertise.25,26
At Queen’s, the Centre for Intelligent
Sustainable Computing (CISC) is focused
on excellence in research applied to realworld problems, with expertise in AI, scalable
algorithms, energy-efficient hardware and
maintainable software for future technologies.
Its goal is ambitious: to establish Queen’s
as the UK’s leading university for the
translation of research in Computer Science
& Engineering. Likewise, Ulster University’s
Artificial Intelligence Research Centre aims
to create state-of-the-art AI solutions for
practical problems, with the objectives of
advancing the AI field, and developing new
and existing networks with national and
international AI centres for competitiveness.
Both institutions are committed to providing
high-quality training for the next generation
of researchers, and to contributing to
the community locally, nationally and
internationally.

Northern Ireland’s Artificial Intelligence Strategy Consultation Report 2026 13

Their collegiality and commitment to
partnership for positive impact are evidenced
in the combined support to establish the
Artificial Intelligence Collaboration Centre
(AICC) in 2024. This initiative represents an
initial £16.3M investment by both universities
and supported by Invest NI and the
Department for the Economy. As one of the
‘priority for prosperity’ projects in the PfG, the
AICC’s goal is to accelerate AI adoption within
SMEs, and to build AI skills and collaboration
across multiple sectors. More specifically,
AICC aims to deliver 390 postgraduate
scholarships for AI courses, 2000 professional
short courses in AI Foundations for Business,
1100 people trained in AI skills, 248 SMEs with
access to hands-on data science or machine
learning support, and 100 new academicindustry connections, to name a few. The
AICC has proven to be a tremendous resource
for the region, and demand is currently
outstripping supply.
Further resource in the AI and digital space
is present in the Regional City Deals. Specific
projects include:
i. Advanced Manufacturing Innovation
Centre (AMIC, >£95M), led by Queen’s
in partnership with UU and Antrim and
Newtownabbey Borough Council, is a
10,500m2 state-of-the-art facility which
will become NI’s centre for advanced
manufacturing using digital and AI as
enabling technologies.
ii. The Centre for Digital Healthcare
Technology (CDHT, >£40M), led by UU
in partnership with Queen’s, is designed
to accelerate the development and
commercialisation of next-generation
medical technologies and digital healthcare
solutions. Specialist capabilities span

data analytics, artificial intelligence,
surgical robotics, image-guided therapy,
diagnostics, design and simulation, and vital
signs monitoring.
iii. Momentum 1.0 (M1.0, >£70M), led by
Queen’s in partnership with UU, is designed
to support the digital economy, by
increasing the volume and range of digital
innovation and developing skills to meet
industry needs. Its focus is data-driven
innovation for digital health, agri-food,
cybersecurity, semi-conductor security,
space and wireless, fintech and net zero.
iv. Cognitive Analytics and Digital Robotics
Innovation Centre (Cadric, >£39M), led by
UU, has a focus on AI/ML for analytics and
robotics and is designed to be industryfacing, and to support businesses with
industrial multidisciplinary collaboration
and translation of their technologies.
v. Studio Ulster (>£65M), led by UU, is a Tier
1 centre of excellence in Virtual Production
Facilities (motion capture, 3D scanning
studios and a SMART stage), which includes
a 600-seater broadcast studio and film
studio. Such is the demand for its services
that Belfast Harbour is already planning a
£45M expansion to quadruple the size of
the existing studio.
vi. UK Digital Twin Centre is a £35M
investment between Digital Catapult,
Belfast Region City Deal and Innovate
UK, where AI is the core foundational
component.

14 Northern Ireland’s Artificial Intelligence Strategy Consultation Report 2026

2.3 Industry
In terms of the industry landscape in NI, the
Artificial Intelligence Capability Census (2025)
provides a critical baseline to understand
expertise, adoption, opportunity and impact.

Its mapping of NI’s specialist AI sector
identifies 198 companies that are creating
AI solutions, employing 1,340 specialists,
and generating £82M in direct GVA.27

Key statistics from the Census characterising
NI’s AI ecosystem include the following:

46 (23%)

63 (32%)

89 (45%)

122 (62%)

are pure-play
AI firms focused
exclusively on
AI products
and services.

are diversified AI
firms offering AI
alongside broader
technology services.

are AI-enabled firms,
using AI to enhance
existing operations.

are indigenous to
NI, and 76 (38%)
are international
(FDI) operations,
indicating both local
growth and global
attractiveness.

101 (51%)

33%

73%

are primarily using
AI to develop or
enhance products.

provide AI
implementation and
advisory services.

are Belfast-based,
with only 4% in
Derry-Londonderry.

There is therefore
more to be done
to support FDI, to
build capacity in
AI in sectors of
strength outside
Belfast such as
manufacturing,
and to foster a
start-up culture
across the region.

Northern Ireland’s Artificial Intelligence Strategy Consultation Report 2026 15

Within this landscape, areas of significant
strength include: Services & Consulting
(35%); Software Development (33%); Health
& Life Sciences (9%); and Financial Services
including RegTech (6%). The sector may
be small in comparison with the 92,743
companies registered in NI in 2025. However, it
is growing, with the census modelling a range
of scenarios for AI growth in the region to 2028,
and proposing a midpoint scenario where AIrelated GVA could reach £200M by 2028, with
over 2,000 AI professionals employed.
In terms of indigenous companies, Kainos
is the largest player, with around 2,865
employees, an annual revenue of £367.2M in
2025, and a record of securing £61M in public
AI contracts. Established in 1986, Kainos is a
leader in terms of digital solutions to support
business innovation and growth. Working with
sectors including financial services, insurance,
payments, education, government, health

and life sciences, its key areas of expertise
focus on AI for Growth, AI for Efficiency, and
AI Governance, Compliance and Adoption.
For instance, it supports organisations locally,
nationally and internationally to:
• become data-driven, thus enabling them
to manage and realise the value of their
data for improved decision-making, and
to increase efficiency, productivity and
innovation through the use of analytics,
AI and machine learning; and
• use generative AI to model improvements in
customer, user and employee satisfaction.
With this range of key players in government,
FE, HE, industry and beyond (as set out in
Figure 1), NI has an outstanding pre-existing
network of AI expertise that is poised for
delivery and transformation.

16 Northern Ireland’s Artificial Intelligence Strategy Consultation Report 2026

Examples of the AI Building Blocks
in Northern Ireland
Research

High Performance Compute – NI
Artificial Intelligence Research Centre - UU
Centre for Sustainable Intellligent Computing - QUB

Councils

Business

XR Belfast
Belfast Region City Deals
Derry Strabane City Deals

Innovation

CDHT; CADRIC; AMIC; M1.0
Digital Twin
Catalyst Innovation Hubs
Studio Ulster

Arms Length Bodies

AICC - Support for SMEs
Consensus Report 2025 198 AI Companies
Kainos - 4th in UK for AI Public
Sector contracts
Big 4 - all with AI Divisions

Education

HSC - Boneview
NISRA - Consultations

180+ academics conducting
research on AI
Curriculum integration across
FE and HE
Transform ED Strategy

Government Depts
AI Champions
Office of AI & Digital
AI Taskforce

Figure 1: The Foundations for AI Growth in Northern Ireland.

Northern Ireland’s Artificial Intelligence Strategy Consultation Report 2026 17

3. The AI
Principles for
Northern Ireland
Robust AI principles are critical to promoting the use of innovative and
trustworthy technologies. For NI, the principles establish a responsible and
ethical foundation for how AI is to be deployed across the public sector.
The UK has five regulatory principles with ten
common principles for the public sector, while
the EU has seven principles for responsible
AI.28,29 NI’s eight principles have been designed
to be easily understood, future-facing and
for deployment as a supporting framework

for all AI use in the public sector (Figure 2).
They reflect NI’s commitment to inclusivity,
sustainability, lifelong learning, and the public
good. Without this, the public sector risks
inconsistency, duplication and the loss of trust.

18 Northern Ireland’s Artificial Intelligence Strategy Consultation Report 2026

Human
Oversight

Training and
Literacy

Societal
Benefit

Accountability
and Redress

8

AI principles for NI

Sustainability

Data
Governance

Technical Safety
and Security
Fairness and
Transparency

Figure 2.
The Eight Principles for Responsible AI in Northern Ireland.
Each principle sets an operational expectation for how
AI should be developed, procured, and managed.

Northern Ireland’s Artificial Intelligence Strategy Consultation Report 2026 19

Principle 1:
Human Oversight
Human oversight has been well documented as a key requirement for
the use of AI in the public sector. 30,31 It is critical that the human who is
either ‘in the loop’ or ‘on the loop’ has both sufficient expertise to identify
issues, and the acuity to understand when the algorithmic decisions need
to be questioned.
‘In the loop’ refers to humans making every
decision, while ‘on the loop’ indicates
monitoring and appropriate intervention.32,33
This must be considered as a fundamental
role in every AI public sector project, and it
should not fall to one person as that carries
the risk of a single point of failure. Every AI
project should have a human oversight

team that is responsible for ensuring
accuracy, preventing bias, integrating citizen
perspectives and values, and questioning the
outputs. The human oversight team should be
embedded across the entire AI lifecycle, with
human intervention points being documented
for the purposes of good governance
and accountability.

Recommended Actions

Assemble human oversight
teams within each
Department and ALB that are
not only sufficiently trained,
but also critical thinkers and
challengers.

Define a framework to
detail the exact role and
responsibility of the human
oversight teams.

20 Northern Ireland’s Artificial Intelligence Strategy Consultation Report 2026

Create a human oversight
disclosure plan for each
project to show intervention
points and the mechanisms
by which negative outputs
are detected and corrected.

Principle 2:
Accountability & Redress
Clear lines of responsibility are critical for the successful delivery of AI
projects.34 These should cover data, algorithms, project design and project
outcomes, and responsible officers should be clearly documented.
This clarity is essential for auditing purposes,
but it is also valuable in making explicit the
decision-making process in the AI lifecycle. If
the accountable person changes during the
lifecycle of the AI project, this must also be
documented. Accountability plays a key role in
building trust and confidence in the use of
AI, particularly in government where levels

of trust are low. Accountability must also be
combined with clearly-defined avenues for
redress, which may range from shared review
processes that build public trust, to reporting
negative impacts and explaining solutions.35,36
The redress function must be accessible and
available internally and externally to align with
the principle of transparency.

Recommended Actions

Define redress mechanisms
for use across public
sector bodies.

Ensure accountable officers
are listed on every project.

Develop a process
for identification and
disclosure of errors.

Northern Ireland’s Artificial Intelligence Strategy Consultation Report 2026 21

Principle 3:
Data Governance
This principle is based on ensuring that policies and processes protect
personal data and that any data used is subject to the highest standards
of data governance.37
Given that all AI projects require data, the
fairness of all AI-driven outputs is directly
impacted by the integrity of the data. Public
sector bodies should therefore have a Data
Protection Officer who is equipped to advise
specifically on the AI-related data protections
and ensure compliance. The DPO should form
an integral part of the Human Oversight Team
and assist with the Data Protection Impact
Assessments (DPIAs).

Public sector organisations in NI operate
under the UK GDPR and Data Protection Act
of 2018.38 Under Article 35 of the regulations,39
these assessments are mandatory before
commencement of any AI project. DPIAs
are live documents and play a key part in
ensuring accountability and transparency.
The DPO is also the main point of contact for
citizens concerned about use of their data in
AI systems and, as such, has a key function in
terms of managing avenues for redress.

Recommended Actions

Amend DPIAs as required to
integrate the AI principles.

Enable visibility of
organisational DPOs.

22 Northern Ireland’s Artificial Intelligence Strategy Consultation Report 2026

Embed document
validation and verification
steps across the
data lifecycle.

Principle 4:
Technical Safety & Security
Public sector AI must be safe, secure, and resilient to threat. It must
be safe in the sense of a ‘no harm’ approach to humans and the
environment, 40 and public sector AI should follow best practice in risk
management and testing with compliance to recognised standards.
It must be secure to avoid any unauthorised
access to, or alteration of, data. It is critical, for
example, that AI services are resilient to cyberattacks. Public sector bodies are guided by
the UK Government Cyber Security Strategy
(2022 to 2030),41 with further resources from
the UK National Cyber Security Centre (NCSC)
providing a cyber assessment framework to
assist with AI security practices.

Any use of third-party systems by the public
sector must conform to the internal safety
and security policies of each Department.
It is also critical to ensure not only that the
same AI system is maintained consistently
throughout the project lifecycle, but that
Departments can clearly evidence and
demonstrate this compliance and continuity.

Recommended Actions

Ensure deep technical
and cyber expertise
is embedded in human
oversight teams.

Develop public sector
standards for AI
risk assessment and
management.

Design and declare
consistency testing for
systems through the
AI lifecycle.

Northern Ireland’s Artificial Intelligence Strategy Consultation Report 2026 23

Principle 5:
Fairness & Transparency
All uses of AI in the public sector should uphold values of fairness and
inclusivity without discrimination or bias against any demographic or
individual, or to propagate misinformation.
It is critical that bias detection is built into
all AI projects and that this is particularly
considered when a model is using training
data. Al must be developed and implemented
in a way that mitigates bias, respects the rule
of law, protects human rights, and embraces
diversity.42 Specifically in the political context,
AI must not be used to manipulate voters,
fabricate content, distort public debate, or
unduly alter the public’s perception of the

party and/or its representatives. The use
of AI in the public sector should be clear,
understandable and interpretable for all
groups, particularly vulnerable or marginalised
communities. Citizens should be advised
when interacting with AI or AI-generated
content and be able to understand the
outputs. Whenever AI is used, it should be
documented, auditable and open to
challenge to maintain fairness and trust.

Recommended Actions

Ensure bias detection
methods are built into
AI models.

Create a Repository for all
Public Sector AI projects.

24 Northern Ireland’s Artificial Intelligence Strategy Consultation Report 2026

Design communication
materials for AI projects.

Principle 6:
Environmental Sustainability
The NI Executive’s Climate Action Plan has an overall target to achieve
net-zero greenhouse gas emissions by 2050 with annual carbon budget
targets also agreed. Within this context, the present principle is designed
with a dual purpose.
Firstly, AI should be deployed to support
sustainable solutions in energy or agriculture,
or to monitor and model our natural
environment. Such uses also contribute
to longer-term societal and economic
sustainability. Secondly, our approach to
AI use must consider energy sources and
efficiencies across all stages of the AI lifecycle.

This includes ensuring the development
of AI is proportionate and does not place
excessive demands on our energy and water
infrastructure at the expense of communities.
In short, the deployment of AI across the
public sector must contribute in the broadest
sense to a sustainable future.43,44

Recommended Actions

Detail how individual AI
projects can contribute to a
sustainable future.

Assess feasibility of
disclosing the energy
source and usage associated
with all AI projects.

Report mitigations.

Northern Ireland’s Artificial Intelligence Strategy Consultation Report 2026 25

Principle 7:
Societal Benefit
Al systems must be used to enhance productivity and efficiency in
the public sector, improve the citizen experience, and support better
decision-making.
For example, public servants should
be freed up for human interactions by
automating routine public-facing tasks; public
consultations should be more quickly and
efficiently completed to enable a swifter
passage to policy; public services should be
tailored to local populations; and enhanced
data analysis should be used to forecast

and simulate policy impact and resource
allocation for integrated, cross-departmental
transformation. However, every AI initiative
must demonstrate a measurable benefit for
citizens or public services, and there must
be clear documentation to support the value
of pursuing an AI-based solution over
other approaches.

Recommended Actions

Integrate a cost-benefit
assessment matrix to
demonstrate the value of
AI use over other methods
at project development/
business case stage.

Include metrics to monitor
operational efficiency,
cost effectiveness, quality
of citizen experience,
and improved outcomes
throughout project delivery.

26 Northern Ireland’s Artificial Intelligence Strategy Consultation Report 2026

Produce impact summaries
at project completion and
share best practice and
lessons learned.

Principle 8:
Training & Literacy
It is critical that we create accessible and inclusive training opportunities
for all staff if we are to have an AI-enabled public sector.
Basic training, covering AI technologies,
applications and ethical implications, should
be built into new staff inductions, and basic
technologies should be rolled out as a priority
to increase efficiency in routine office tasks.
Intermediate skills – both technical and those
required to lead on the strategic integration
of AI – will be necessary to deliver AI-based
public service transformation projects, and
this will require new career pathways within
the public sector. Human Oversight Teams
should also include a colleague being trained
in the role to build future capacity. Advanced
skills can significantly increase research
capability across Departments and generate

a workforce of innovators and change agents.
Investment in a Skills Academy, potentially
in collaboration with the HE/Industry sector,
would provide a mechanism not only for
upskilling but also reskilling where there is a
potential risk of AI-displacement. Working in
tandem with an AI Workforce Observatory,
the public sector must begin to futureproof
for the longer term, while also providing safe
spaces for experimentation, for example
through sandboxes, to increase confidence
and trust in the short and medium terms.
Confidence and trust in AI among public
sector workers will in turn build public
confidence and trust.

Recommended Actions

Provide training to
all public sector staff
on AI basics.

Develop AI-specific
career pathways
within the public
sector.

These principles are designed to guide
public sector use of AI in NI. Our ambition
is that these principles will be publicly
communicated, and consistently applied
and upheld over time, to provide clarity
for citizens, public servants, and industry
partners. These principles will be applied in
the procurement process for suppliers who
must evidence how their AI systems support
the requirements for oversight, fairness,
transparency, accountability, sustainability,
training and societal benefits. For the

Integrate trainees
into every Human
Oversight Team to
build capacity.

Establish an AI and
Digital focused
Public Sector Skills
Academy aligned to
the Digital Workplace
Programme.

private sector, four main standards apply as
detailed by AICC (Fairness, Accountability,
Sustainability, and Transparency).45 However,
a recent (2025) report by EY concluded that
businesses which align with responsible AI
principles have a strategic advantage and a
strong foundation for scaling, which in turn
adds value to the business.46 Other sectors
may therefore wish to draw on this wider
set of principles as a blueprint for their own
approach to AI transformation.

Northern Ireland’s Artificial Intelligence Strategy Consultation Report 2026 27

4. AI Governance
Governance across the public sector is designed to provide the
overarching framework for AI regulation. Strong governance enables
responsible innovation and adoption, and creates the assurance for
citizens, businesses and international stakeholders that NI’s adoption of
AI is trustworthy.
The AI governance landscape varies across
jurisdictions. Currently in the UK, there is a
pro-innovation framework that is underpinned
by five principles which are aligned to those
proposed for NI (Safety, security & robustness;
Appropriate transparency and explainability;
Fairness; Accountability and governance;
Contestability and redress). In the UK, these
are not statutory, but there is an expectation
that they are applied across all sectors.
Similarly in NI, our eight core principles should
be applied in the design, use and implementation
of AI projects. In the Republic of Ireland
context, the National Standards Authority of
Ireland (NSAI) is working on ensuring that the
EU standards for AI are being implemented.47
However, it is important to note that the EU
AI Act is not concerned with businesses who
use AI for efficiencies. Rather, it is designed
to safeguard high-risk applications that may
impact citizens’ rights or safety.

It is therefore critical that AI governance
across the public sector includes sufficient
protections while also being dynamically
enabling. Any external AI procured should
meet this governance criterion. In addition,
an AI Governance Board should be created
i.e. a cross-sectoral oversight body with citizen,
academic, and industry representation and
a strong focus on ethics. Across the public
sector, an internal inventory of AI use should
be available via a centralised repository which
catalogues all AI purpose, systems, tools,
applications, functionality, risks, stakeholders,
and compliance with the governance framework.
All initiatives that are planned for the future,
as well as those that are ongoing or completed
in the past, should be compiled along with key
learnings. This inventory will serve as a single
source of truth and will encourage AI circularity
among the public sector community with next
user/adopter advantages.

This means that governance must be split
between the public and private sectors, as
there are different drivers for the use and
outcomes of AI in each. Firstly, in the public
sector, governance needs to be designed to
cover people, process, procurement, data, AI
build, monitoring and reporting. Secondly,
we should be actively encouraging our
commercial sectors to ‘break the ceiling’
with new innovations and applications of AI.
However, symbiosis will occur when both
sectors are committed to the NI principles,
and when the latest AI innovations flow
through to the public sector.

For the private sector, as an SME-driven
economy, NI will have many businesses that
are trying to understand where to start. For
those at the beginning of their journey, AICC
offers support through the Transformer
Programme and through collaborative R&D.
An additional invaluable resource in terms
of governance is AICC’s Responsible AI Hub
which includes responsible AI fundamentals
for business, an insight section and, most
importantly, practical tools.

28 Northern Ireland’s Artificial Intelligence Strategy Consultation Report 2026

For example, AICC has developed the Core
Assessment of Governance and Ethics (CAGE)
tool which can aid with AI procurement or
AI build. By working through the tool, each
AI project can have a governance bundle,
create a data fact sheet, complete a harm
assessment, and review organisational
governance. For individual AI projects.

CAGE provides a score and recommendations
across six areas (Figure 3). In short, this is an
excellent practical resource for those at the
start of their AI journey in the private sector,
and the possibility of adapting it to support
public sector AI projects should be considered.

Good AI Project

56 out of 251
A lower score means your AI
project is more ethical. Try to
get the lowest score you can!
Core Action: Limited risk
might still have potential to
improve.

Is this a prohibited use of AI?
Yes

No

Is this a high risk area for AI?
Yes

No

Figure 3.
Using a Demo Company to show an example overview score from the CAGE tool. Each section is
then broken down with recommendations for improvement.

Recommended Actions

Develop a
governance
framework and tool
for public sector use
with AI projects.

Establish a
cross-sectoral AI
governance board.

Produce internal
inventories of AI
projects across all
public sector bodies.

Deliver bite-sized AI
governance training
for public & private
sector leaders.

Northern Ireland’s Artificial Intelligence Strategy Consultation Report 2026 29

5. AI and
Infrastructure
AI is only as strong as the data that underpins it. High-quality, well-governed
data can unlock innovation and efficiency across all sectors, while poor,
siloed, or insecure data can undermine projects and erode trust. It is
therefore key that any Data Strategy integrates with the AI Strategy.
In the public sector, data must be managed
responsibly, shared appropriately, and
safeguarded against misuse. While both
sectors must comply with GDPR standards,
there is also a significant opportunity to
leverage public sector data for research. In
fact, the Office for Statistics Regulation has
called for the UK government to ensure that
datasets are shared and linked for research
and statistical purposes. This call chimes
with that of many academics and industry
stakeholders who have requested a similar
approach in NI. The value of accessing data for
impact was evidenced in the Administrative
Data Research UK Annual Report 23/24, where
de-identified data from the NI Registry of
Self-Harm was linked to other sources
of health and mortality data to provide
evidenced-based recommendations for the
reduction of self-harm and suicide in NI.48
Many AI businesses in NI have also advocated
for the need to access large datasets in
order to train their models. As more AI
projects are planned, and opportunities are
uncovered, planning must therefore be in
place to expand the publishing of anonymised
datasets in order to stimulate innovation
and growth, provided privacy is protected.
Across the public sector, this is safeguarded
in part through data minimisation, whereby
AI systems use only the data necessary for
projects. Data minimisation aligns with our
NI principles, reduces risks, and prevents
unnecessary data accumulation.49 Many
datasets exist in isolation across the public

sector, but governance framework structures
should enable collaboration and interoperable
platforms so that maximal impact can be
extracted from the wide range of available data.
For many public sector AI projects, cloud
computing will be used. This requires data
centres, and at present NI has nine. Yet with
twice the population, Ireland has >135 data
centres. This presents an opportunity for NI
as >20% of renewable energy generation is
curtailed due to system constraints, i.e. we
produce more than we use. As such, NI could
develop a strategic, whole system plan for
a green data centre industry which attracts
FDI, as proposed in a 2024 report by KPMG,50
provided that it aligns with other strategic
energy demands. This is also recognised in
the Matrix report as essential to fulfilling our
AI ambitions. NI should also develop its own
capability for AI and the necessary compute
infrastructure to avoid vendor lock-in with
cloud services. Cloud is too expensive for
training new AI models, for allowing space for
experimentation, or for deep R&D. Sovereign,
green, high-performance computing is
therefore essential.
Digital competency is also a key enabler for
AI. AI adoption should not create parallel or
fragmented systems but should build on
and strengthen existing infrastructures. Our
current infrastructure includes full-fibre
connectivity which, at 93% with 94% gigabitcapable, is the highest availability across all
the four nations according to Ofcom.51

30 Northern Ireland’s Artificial Intelligence Strategy Consultation Report 2026

In research, the Centre for Secure Information
Technologies (CSIT) at Queen’s University
and the BT Ireland Innovation Centre at Ulster
University are conduits for advanced wireless
technology research. Across the public sector,
too, individual Departments are implementing
digital strategies and programmes, such
as Health and Social Care’s Encompass
programme, the Northern Ireland Courts and
Tribunals Service’s ‘Digital First’ approach,
and DAERA’s platforms such as the Single
Application and Map Service. Central digital
functions also exist, with the Department of
Finance providing essential IT infrastructure,
digital security, and finance shared services,
while NI Direct serves as a shared hub for
information and transactions. Yet there is
more that can be done. A recent digital

maturity assessment across government
Departments identified that, in all areas, NICS
was at a legacy state. Recommendations of
relevance for our AI ambition include: the
need for an ambitious digital vision and plan,
and a ‘bespoke’ centralised digital service
to support Departments, including digital
and data specialists, that focuses on rapid
transformation of skills and culture. It is also
critical that immediate digital solutions are
sought for procurement. Procurement models
across the public sector should allow modular,
phased contracts that enable testing and
evaluation before scaling. This avoids vendor
lock-in and ensures the “right tool for the right
use case”, which is critical for AI. Finally, across
the entire public sector, there must be ‘safe
spaces’ built into the infrastructure for testing.

Recommended Actions

Identify high value
datasets across all sectors
that can be leveraged and
published openly.

Enable legislation to share
a wider range of datasets.

Develop an integrated
data strategy that builds
on the work of NISRA.

Create a central unit
to rapidly enhance AI
capability.

Ensure we have sufficient
high performance
compute facilities.

Northern Ireland’s Artificial Intelligence Strategy Consultation Report 2026 31

6. AI and Skills
It is the complementarity between sophisticated AI tools and skilled
human beings that will create transformation, whether that is in relation
to routine business processes or groundbreaking research.
The present strategy is therefore deliberate
in identifying Training and Literacy as one of
its eight core principles. Training is not simply
an enabler; it is fundamental, and in terms
of inclusion, digital access and literacy are
increasingly recognised as basic human rights.
Ensuring that our citizens have accessible
opportunities to develop the skills to use AI
responsibly, ethically, appropriately for the
desired outcome, and with an appreciation of
risks and mitigations, is critical to developing
an AI-literate, future-ready population.

their learning. That requires consistent, regionwide guidelines and policies for both teachers
and pupils on responsible and ethical use,
on approved tools, and on e-safety and data
use. It also requires support, both investment
and advocacy, to extend and upscale
projects such as the Trailblazing NI Report on
Generative AI in Education produced by Ulster
University in collaboration with the Education
Authority, or the PG Cert (Education) in
Digital Skills recently launched by Stranmillis
University College.52

The overview of the AI landscape for NI
demonstrates that we already have much to
offer across the FE and HE sector in terms
of AI skills development opportunities,
albeit there is scope for wider integration of
AI across disciplines. As noted previously,
organisations such as AICC are also
supporting SMEs to ensure they can avail
of tools to support efficient working in an
environment where resource may be scarce,
and to enable data-driven insights for growth.

There are also gaps in other sectors. For
example, the community and voluntary
sectors, among those who are often most
stretched for resource, would benefit from
access to the type of training provided
by AICC. As indicated, the Matrix Report
recognises the contribution of AICC, while
also calling for ‘order-of-magnitude expansion
in both [its] reach and resources’. Voluntary
and community sector organisations are also
those which commonly represent groups
facing digital exclusion. The Digital Skills in
Northern Ireland report (2024-25) published
by NISRA in January 2026 shows that while
Northern Ireland overall has significantly
higher digital skill levels than the European
average, there are significant disparities within
that, with certain groups facing higher levels
of exclusion than elsewhere in the UK.53

However, the skills agenda for AI needs to
begin earlier, at school level. This requires
support for teachers to understand not only
how they can use AI in their own practice (e.g.
AI assistance with administrative or grading
tasks, or in accessing data-driven insights into
student performance and outcomes), but also
how they can train pupils to integrate AI into

32 Northern Ireland’s Artificial Intelligence Strategy Consultation Report 2026

For example:

37%

65+

32%

29%

of people aged 16
and over have above
basic digital skills,
but almost 1 in 5
have none.

Respondents in the
65+ age group are
four times as likely to
report that they have
no digital skills (41%)
than those aged
16-49 (10%).

of those who are
economically inactive
have no digital skills
in comparison with
6.2% of those who are
economically active.

of people from
the most socioeconomically
deprived areas have
above basic digital
skills, compared
to 49% in the least
deprived areas.

Interventions are therefore needed to address
these inequalities in digital skills in order to
avoid further exclusion as the AI revolution
transforms the educational, leisure, and
employment landscape at pace. It is also
critical to ensure that a strategy is in place for
upskilling and reskilling workers at risk of
AI-displacement, many of whom are likely to
be from groups already facing inequalities.

Skills and Training solutions must therefore
operate at a range of levels, with an AI
Workforce Observatory of the kind proposed
in the Matrix Report as a possible mechanism
for the necessary and ongoing horizonscanning that will be required given the
pace of innovation and transformation.

Northern Ireland’s Artificial Intelligence Strategy Consultation Report 2026 33

6.1 Basic skills:
The Matrix report refers to an AI Skills Surge
Programme that combines a public awareness
campaign with access to basic training to
ensure that all citizens are ‘AI-capable’. There
are many existing resources such as Elements
of AI, Google AI Essentials and IBM SkillsBuild
which can be accessed by the general public.
Queen’s University’s AI Hub is another freely
available resource which, while targeted for
the most part at learners and educators, also
contains bite-sized introductions to AI tools
that are relevant to a wider audience. The
school, FE and HE sectors could also commit
to integrating foundational AI literacy into
all curricula.
6.2 Intermediate skills:
A higher level of skills will be required for
transformation within organisations, whether
that is in schools, businesses, charities, or
government. To deliver the requisite step
change means combining general training
such as that offered by the AICC, with a
conscious focus on capacity building through
‘Train the Trainer’ programmes that increase
competence and confidence in the use of AI
to enhance business processes. In all

organisations, transformation must also be
championed by leaders, given that, as noted
in the Matrix report, ‘organisations recognise
AI’s potential but lack the confidence to
move beyond cautious experimentation to
meaningful deployment and integration’.
6.3 Advanced skills:
At the highest level, there is a need for both
advanced technical skills e.g. for innovation
and research in industry or universities, and
advanced skills in AI transformation and
strategy delivery. Fostering these skills will
require an audit of our current HE provision
that is grounded in horizon scanning for future
skills needs. The outcome of such an audit
may be additional provision in a particular
specialist area such as Data Analytics, and/
or an increase in cross-functional degrees
such as Joint or Major/Minor degree pathways
combining AI with any discipline e.g. Politics
and AI, Languages with AI. Engineering and
AI etc. If every profession is going to be
transformed by AI, graduates who combine
expertise in AI with other disciplines will be at
a premium. However, linking in with the needs
of industry will be key.

34 Northern Ireland’s Artificial Intelligence Strategy Consultation Report 2026

Recommended Actions

Audit educational provision across
the region to identify gaps, including
gender-based gaps, as noted in the survey
conducted by the Strategic Policy Unit at
Ulster University, and develop an integrated
strategy to future-proof our skills landscape.

Develop region-wide guidance for use
of AI in Schools.

Roll out public awareness campaign
promoting access to freely accessible
basic skills training.
Scope out the AI needs and opportunities
for the community and voluntary sector
through engagement with NICVA, and
develop a business case for mechanisms to
support e.g. through AICC, FE or HE, although
it should be noted that supporting the most
marginalised often requires direct provision
through community and voluntary groups.

Support further Integration of AI use into
teacher training provision.

Integrate a basic AI training module/
session into new staff inductions
across sectors.

Create mechanisms for mentorship,
best-practice sharing, and peer
advocacy for organisational leaders to
develop confidence in AI transformation.

Northern Ireland’s Artificial Intelligence Strategy Consultation Report 2026 35

7. AI & Public Sector
Transformation
Public sector transformation is the reimagination of how we design and deliver
our services to be efficient, cost-effective, and with enhanced citizen benefit.
AI and digital are enabling technologies
for public sector transformation that will
automate key tasks, generate information,
and provide the in-depth analysis of data
which will ultimately drive evidence-based
decision-making. Furthermore, appropriate
analysis of current policies and projects will
enable decision-makers to determine whether
systems and initiatives are successful, need
adaptation, or have failed. This is critical to
ensure appropriate use of resources and
delivery of services for citizens.

can be achieved, but governance challenges
and risk aversion remain. Cultural learning
and transformation must therefore be part
of the plan. We must also recognise that
large-scale transformation in one go is
virtually impossible; but if we break down
the transformation agenda into readily
comprehensible projects with a clear
emphasis on value and impact, and couple
this with training for widespread roll-out, and
a space for experimentation, an exponential
amount can be achieved.

The academic, commercial and government
sectors have worked collaboratively to
highlight the opportunity for public sector
transformation; yet many struggle to
understand what it means. In essence, the
public are posing the question of how to
achieve more with the same resource, and the
private sector are setting out how this

Currently the exception rather than standard
practice, quantifiable outputs must be
articulated for every project. There are also
significant benefits in raising public awareness
of ongoing projects and their outputs. The
Office of AI and Digital and the Delivery
Unit will have a key role to play in the
recommended actions.

Table 2. Examples of Potential AI-driven Projects for Transformation of Public Services.
Area

Application

Why

All Public
Sector

Efficiency tools for minutes,
consultation analysis, machinery
of government, information,
evidence generation for policies,
data generation to demonstrate
whether strategies are working.

Saves staff time and financial resources that
could be deployed to reskill and elevate
employee satisfaction.

Health

AI-based diagnostics

Support for clinicians with fractures, cancer,
strokes etc from images; support reduction
in waiting lists.

AI operational processes

Helping with discharge processes, demand for
beds, optimal allocation; should improve patient
satisfaction.

36 Northern Ireland’s Artificial Intelligence Strategy Consultation Report 2026

Area

Application

Why

Education

AI could aid with lessons, content For educators this would enable more time
and consistent feedback.
with the students.
AI could adapt material for
For students with a range of learning styles,
individual needs, support tutoring this could result in better outcomes.
and interactive learning.

Infrastructure

Justice

Environment

Communities

AI for wastewater management

Detects abnormal flow, enables preventative action,
can identify types of contamination, can be used to
reduce spillovers.

AI for traffic management

Can predict congested roads, can optimise traffic
signals, can detect safety breaches. Improves user
and road safety.

AI for road management

Detects defects of early damage via sensors,
helps prioritise repairs, helps optimise resources.

Data analysis & research

Large volumes of data processed and analysed to
speed up the process.

AI support for education

Enable personalised rehabilitation for offenders.

AI support for Ending Violence
against Women and Girls

Accessing justice and health records to identify
those most at risk.

AI to analyse satellite data

Monitor deforestation, land use and
coastal erosion.

AI for farming

Precision Agriculture, aids with yield predictions,
livestock management, optimises water and
fertiliser use; saves time and resource.

AI for water management

Sensors for flooding, pollution control and
resource allocation.

AI for change

Citizens are encouraged to participate to use their
data to help drive social changes.

AI in housing

Improved property management & tenant services.

AI to link citizen services

For example, in the case of bereavement, all of the
relevant government services are notified reducing
stress on families.

Recommended Actions

Use the Citizens’ Forum
as a lever for feedback and
positive change.

Develop a pro-active
plan for Public Sector
Transformation, identifying
all potential use cases.

Provide clear guidance on
quantifiable measurements
of success or failure.

Northern Ireland’s Artificial Intelligence Strategy Consultation Report 2026 37

8. AI and Citizens
Technological innovation of any kind is meaningless without the buy-in of
those it is designed to impact. On a fundamental level, therefore, we need
to be able to bring to life the potential benefits of AI for all cross-sections of
our population.
Why should a construction worker care about
AI adoption as much as a business leader,
for example? The creation of key personas to
articulate how a wide range of individuals fit
into, and benefit from, an AI society can form
the basis of a marketing campaign to assist
in answering the fundamental question of
‘why AI?’.
Beyond that, if we are to realise the potential
benefits of AI adoption across sectors and
across the region, our citizens must have trust
and confidence in it. This is particularly true
in the case of public sector transformation
which will impact all of our lives, from health to
education, and from justice to infrastructure.
Yet, according to the AI Pulse: Public Sentiment
in Northern Ireland on Artificial Intelligence
report published by Ulster University’s
Strategic Policy Unit in December 2025,
only 10% agree that governments/public
organisations in Northern Ireland will manage
AI appropriately. Levels of trust are therefore
low and require a range of approaches to
tackle concerns.54
Trust and confidence will be driven in part
by robust regulatory frameworks, but that on
its own will not suffice. Not only must these
frameworks be co-created with citizens, but
ongoing grassroots engagement and genuine
dialogue and transparency around AI use will
also be critical.55 Citizen engagement must
also reflect the diversity of our population,
so that concerns around bias against certain
groups can be assuaged, and disadvantage
and exclusion are not reinforced.

Meaningful and visible mechanisms, based
on participatory methods, are therefore
needed to ensure inclusivity, trust, and citizen
advocacy, potentially within the framework of
an AI Charter similar to the one that has been
developed by the Liverpool City Region or the
UK Government’s Digital Charter.56,57 The SPU
survey indicates that 86.7% of respondents
agree or strongly agree that there should be
a voice for citizens in decision-making
regarding AI.
Increased confidence will also come with
increased understanding, which further
supports the proposed actions around
enhanced access to basic AI skills training
for all. With enhanced AI literacy, this new
technology can be demystified and benefits
understood. This will in turn generate higher
levels of confidence in public sector use of
AI for citizens’ services, where the highest
levels of concern persist.
An awareness-raising campaign will also
be of value, showcasing examples of use in
service delivery, and directing the general
population towards resources such as My
AI which showcases use cases in business,
education and government, from Estée Lauder
using AI to revolutionise trend forecasting
and consumer marketing, to sound analysis of
car performance to provide early detection
of servicing and maintenance needs, to
educational projects shifting pedagogy from
chalkboards to chatbots, to the use of Large
Language Models to enhance diagnostics
in healthcare.A

38 Northern Ireland’s Artificial Intelligence Strategy Consultation Report 2026

The AI Pulse report, based on a survey of
almost 2000 respondents, provides an
invaluable temperature check on attitudes
towards AI across the population of NI,
and this should inform awareness-raising
campaigns. The results reveal a divided
landscape with, for example, 38% of
respondents describing their attitude to AI as
positive or very positive and an almost equal
percentage, 38%, positioning themselves as

negative or very negative. 21.9% identified
as neither positive nor negative, so there
is a significant opportunity to influence
perceptions among a sizeable minority.
However, only 10% currently believe that AI
presents greater opportunities than risks;
46% believe that it presents greater risks than
opportunities. Accuracy and responsible use
are key areas of concern:

57%

75%

95%

disagree/strongly disagree
that they can trust AI to
provide accurate results.

disagree/strongly disagree
with the statement that they
can trust AI to be used in an
ethical and responsible way.

agree/strongly agree that
there should be a strong
ethical framework for the
ethical use of AI.

Yet despite these concerns, respondents still
see considerable opportunity for positive
benefits. For example, there are generally high
levels of belief in the value of AI use in sectors
such as medical and scientific discovery,
healthcare (e.g. diagnostics), education and
learning (although a significant 13% strongly
disagree here); traffic management; energy
infrastructure. As is to be expected, there is a
more mixed picture on its use in policing and
law enforcement.
There is also broad positivity on the potential
benefits for use in environmental protection,
delivery of public services, interaction with
government for administrative tasks, and
business and industry. The fact that typically
around one fifth of respondents

provide neutral responses on these potential
uses would indicate a lack of certainty
or knowledge, and therefore a significant
opportunity for deployment of information
campaigns and a shift towards greater buy-in.
In short, the survey is telling for it reveals
strong concerns around risks and ethical
use, but equally strong indications that
respondents can see potential benefits.
This would suggest that if we can create
an appropriate framework, charter,
guidance etc to build citizens’ trust, then
there is real potential for acceptance and
indeed enthusiasm for the potential of AI
transformation in NI. The activity of the
Scottish AI Alliance and Irish AI Advisory
Council may offer useful models.

Northern Ireland’s Artificial Intelligence Strategy Consultation Report 2026 39

Recommended Actions

Create a publicly available AI Register of
Systems to explain, in accessible language,
how these systems are used, the societal
benefits, and the safeguards in place to
ensure responsible and ethical adoption.

Establish a core AI Citizens’ Panel,
with diverse representation, to promote
involvement in decision-making around
AI use, guidance, redress and use online
methods to engage a wider demographic.

Develop an AI Charter in collaboration
with the AI Citizens’ Panel.

Develop an awareness-raising campaign
to showcase public sector AI-driven
projects and their benefits.

40 Northern Ireland’s Artificial Intelligence Strategy Consultation Report 2026

Conclusion
NI is on the threshold of AI transformation. AI is here, so we must embrace its
potential; otherwise, we will be left behind. AI can complement and enhance
human capability; it can reshape how we work and learn; it is a lever for
innovation, growth and productivity.
What is more, we have an ecosystem here that
is built on deep expertise across all sectors
and a genuine will to collaborate in order to
realise the benefits for the region as a whole.
Yet the strategy also underlines that
transformation must be grounded in
responsibility. Our citizens are enthusiastic
about AI’s potential, but they have concerns

about ethical use. That is why the strategy
is committed to, and recommends concrete
actions for, requiring transparency,
safeguarding privacy, championing inclusivity,
ensuring accountability, and building
capability. With this approach, AI can truly
be a catalyst for ‘positive use, positive
inclusion and positive outcomes’.

Northern Ireland’s Artificial Intelligence Strategy Consultation Report 2026 41

Appendix 1:
Summary Actions
1. Develop a comprehensive governance framework for the use of AI in the public sector,
ensuring robust standards for visibility, transparency, accountability, redress, and the
identification and mitigation of bias.
2. Establish clear oversight structures, frameworks, and delivery plans to ensure that
human decision-making remains central to the design, deployment, and operation of
AI systems across the public sector.
3. Design and implement a strategic and operational framework for data protection,
data management, and data sharing, enabling secure and ethical use of data.
4. Develop and deliver a coordinated plan to build AI capability across the public sector,
including skills development, organisational capacity, and access to technical expertise.
5. Create an integrated AI strategy for education, in collaboration with the higher
education, further education, and school sectors, to future-proof the skills landscape
and support long-term workforce readiness.
6. Establish a comprehensive approach to citizen engagement to build trust and public
confidence in AI, including initiatives such as a Citizens’ Panel, the development of
cost-benefit analysis tools, and targeted awareness campaigns highlighting both
safeguards and benefits.

42 Northern Ireland’s Artificial Intelligence Strategy Consultation Report 2026

References
1

https://oecd.ai/en/

2

 ttps://theconversation.com/friday-essay-some-tech-leaders-think-ai-could-outsmarth
us-and-wipe-out-humanity-im-a-professor-of-ai-and-im-not-worried-248901#:~:text=AI%20can%2C%20for%20example%2C%20surpass,ingenuity%2C%20but%20by%20machine%20learning.

3	
https://theconversation.com/ai-was-born-at-a-us-summer-camp-68-years-ago-hereswhy-that-event-still-matters-today-237205
4

https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2772950824003960

5

How does artificial intelligence in radiology improve efficiency and health outcomes?

6

 eep learning and artificial intelligence in sustainability: a review of SDGs, renewable energy,
D
and environmental health

7

Applications of artificial intelligence in engineering and manufacturing: a systematic review

8

 ttps://www.ibm.com/think/topics/artificial-intelligence#:~:text=AI%20agents%20and%20
h
agentic%20AI,-An%20AI%20agent&text=Agentic%20AI%20is%20a%20system,2025%20
guide%20to%20AI%20agents

9

https://matrixni.org/documents/ai-and-the-future-of-work-in-northern-ireland/

10	
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/ai-opportunities-action-plan/ai-opportunities-action-plan
11	
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/media/67aca2f7e400ae62338324bd/AI_Playbook_
for_the_UK_Government__12_02_.pdf
12

https://enterprise.gov.ie/en/publications/national-ai-strategy-refresh-2024.html

13

https://www.gov.scot/publications/scotlands-ai-strategy-trustworthy-ethical-inclusive/

14

https://www.scottishai.com

15

https://www.gov.uk/data-ethics-guidance/the-scottish-ai-playbook

16

https://www.gov.scot/publications/scotlands-ai-strategy-2026-2031/

17

https://www.gov.wales/artificial-intelligence-ai-overview

18

https://www.gov.wales/artificial-intelligence-ai

19

 ttps://www.gov.wales/written-statement-strategic-artificial-intelligence-advisoh
ry-group-and-welsh-government-office-ai

20	
https://www.gov.wales/sites/default/files/pdf-versions/2025/11/2/1763459363/ai-plan-forwales.pdf
21

https://www.economy-ni.gov.uk/articles/ai-strategic-direction

Northern Ireland’s Artificial Intelligence Strategy Consultation Report 2026 43

22 h
 ttps://www.northernireland.gov.uk/sites/default/files/2025-03/programme-forgovernment-2024-2027-our-plan-doing-what-matters-most_1.pdf
23 www.ari.org.uk
24	
https://www.economy-ni.gov.uk/news/further-education-sector-activity-northern-ireland-201920-202324
25	
https://pure.qub.ac.uk/en/persons/?originalSearch=Artificial+intelligence&pageSize=50&ordering=rating&descending=false&showAdvanced=false&orConceptIds=64c68535-e33d-43f0-b6f3-7fd47f94b045&orConceptIds=5a41edec4218-4036-a036-2f4b2283568b&orConceptIds=a8971a95-50da-4ef8b332-e4e013a90443&orConceptIds=43a4664f-0ff2-4853-a3a2-26c44ff2cf10&orConceptIds=a0fb23e8-c02f-407a-94ff-8a542d2d7d40&
allConcepts=false&inferConcepts=false&checkedConcepts=64c68535-e33d-43f0-b6f
3-7fd47f94b045%2C5a41edec-4218-4036-a036-2f4b2283568b%2Ca8971a95-50da4ef8-b332-e4e013a90443%2C43a4664f-0ff2-4853-a3a2-26c44ff2cf10%2Ca0fb23e8c02f-407a-94ff-8a542d2d7d40&searchBy=RelatedConcepts&community=false&direct2experts=false
26 h
 ttps://pure.ulster.ac.uk/en/searchAll/index/?search=Artificial+intelligence&pageSize=25&showAdvanced=false&searchFacet=orConceptIds&orConceptIds=484d0dc0-6fc4-4035-b
367-3be97f885a61&orConceptIds=ad8a2323-0bb1-4069-8e74-e0b0495938d9&orConcep
tIds=b17453dc-6cd3-4763-a3ef-04a8b16c4181&orConceptIds=cecff48a-d18d-466a-b29a3e2e5ea0f383&orConceptIds=6bd20c32-1956-45c7-a38a-84a23b15fb00&allConcepts=fa
lse&conceptsContentFamilies=Person&conceptsContentFamilies=Organisation&conceptsContentFamilies=Project&conceptsContentFamilies=ResearchOutput&conceptsContentFamilies=Prize&inferConcepts=false&checkedConcepts=484d0dc0-6fc4-4035-b367-3
be97f885a61%2Cad8a2323-0bb1-4069-8e74-e0b0495938d9%2Cb17453dc-6cd3-4763a3ef-04a8b16c4181%2Ccecff48a-d18d-466a-b29a-3e2e5ea0f383%2C6bd20c32-195645c7-a38a-84a23b15fb00&searchBy=RelatedConcepts
27 h
 ttps://www.aicc.co/__data/assets/pdf_file/0008/1754090/AICC-Baseline-Study-of-AIAdoption,-Opportunity-and-Impact-in-Northern-Ireland-2025.pdf
28 h
 ttps://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/media/65c0b6bd63a23d0013c821a0/implementing_the_uk_ai_regulatory_principles_guidance_for_regulators.pdf
29 https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/library/ethics-guidelines-trustworthy-ai
30	
https://loti.london/blog/hil-how-can-and-should-officers-intervene-in-ai-powered-publicservices/#:~:text=For%20one%2C%20humans%20at%20least,Our%20research%20plans
31

 ttps://www.mdpi.com/2079-8954/11/11/548?utm_campaign=releaseissue_systems&utm_
h
medium=email&utm_source=releaseissue&utm_term=doilink26

44 Northern Ireland’s Artificial Intelligence Strategy Consultation Report 2026

32	
https://www.trackmind.com/humans-in-the-loop-vs-on-the-loop/#:~:text=Stakes%20
of%20the%20Decision,machine%20outputs%20and%20intervene%20appropriately.
33 https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/9563963
34	
https://www.mdpi.com/2079-8954/11/11/548?utm_campaign=releaseissue_systems&utm_
medium=email&utm_source=releaseissue&utm_term=doilink26
35 https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00146-023-01635-y
36	
https://resolve.cambridge.org/core/journals/cambridge-forum-on-ai-law-and-governance/
article/toward-empowering-ai-governance-with-redress-mechanisms/A1EBCD6CAA146F503C8F6842914F3FB3
37	
https://ico.org.uk/for-organisations/uk-gdpr-guidance-and-resources/artificial-intelligence/
guidance-on-ai-and-data-protection/what-are-the-accountability-and-governance-implications-of-ai/
38 https://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2018/12/contents
39 https://gdpr-info.eu/art-35-gdpr/
40	
https://www.unesco.org/en/artificial-intelligence/recommendation-ethics#:~:text=1.,stakeholder%20and%20Adaptive%20Governance%20&%20Collaboration
41	
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/government-cyber-security-strategy-2022to-2030
42 h
 ttps://www.mckinsey.com/featured-insights/artificial-intelligence/tackling-bias-in-artificial-intelligence-and-in-humans
43	
https://www.ey.com/en_nl/insights/climate-change-sustainability-services/ai-and-sustainability-opportunities-challenges-and-impact
44	
https://www.ienyc.edu/the-blueprint/role-ai-advancing-sustainability/#:~:text=The%20
role%20of%20AI%20in%20sustainable%20development,predict%20environmental%20
risks%20and%20improve%20resource%20efficiency.
45	
https://www.aicc.co/responsible-ai-policy#:~:text=Healthcare:%20Compliance%20with%20
GDPR%2C%20medical,deploying%20Ai%20in%20learning%20environments.
46	
https://www.ey.com/en_uk/newsroom/2025/10/responsible-ai-governance-business-performance
47	
https://www.nsai.ie/images/uploads/general/NSAI_AI_report_digital.pdfhttps://
www.gov.uk/government/statistics/companies-register-activities-statistical-release-april-2024-to-march-2025/companies-register-activities-april-2024-to-march2025#:~:text=The%20effective%20register%20size%2C%20which,9.6%25%20compared%20
with%20FYE%202024)

Northern Ireland’s Artificial Intelligence Strategy Consultation Report 2026 45

48 h
 ttps://www.adruk.org/news-publications/publications-reports/policy-brief-self-harm-suicide-in-northern-ireland-new-evidence-from-linked-administrative-data/
49 h
 ttps://ico.org.uk/for-organisations/uk-gdpr-guidance-and-resources/data-protection-principles/a-guide-to-the-data-protection-principles/data-minimisation/
50 https://kpmg.com/ie/en/insights/esg/green-data-centres-esg.html
51	
https://www.ofcom.org.uk/phones-and-broadband/coverage-and-speeds/northern-irelandleads-the-way-on-full-fibre-connectivity
52 https://www.eani.org.uk/trailblazing-ni-report-generative-ai-in-education
53 https://www.nisra.gov.uk/statistics/people-places-and-culture/digital-skills
54	
https://www.ulster.ac.uk/__data/assets/pdf_file/0008/1794077/UU-SPU-The-AI-Pulse-report.pdf
55	
https://www.oecd.org/en/about/news/press-releases/2025/06/governments-should-strengthen-public-trust-by-improving-efficiency-citizen-engagement-and-access-to-public-services.html
56	
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/digital-charter/digital-charter
57 https://civicdatacooperative.com/app/uploads/2025/07/LCRcharterondataandAI.pdf

46 Northern Ireland’s Artificial Intelligence Strategy Consultation Report 2026

Northern Ireland’s
Artificial Intelligence Strategy
Consultation Report
August 2026
To find out more visit
consultations.nidirect.gov.uk/teo/
artificial-intelligence-public-consultation
or scan:

