ON THIS PAGE

Request info

ON THIS PAGE

Request info

HOW CAN WE HELP?

-

Chat

- 928-523-2230

- provost@nau.edu

- IN>
- Provost>
- Academic Operations>
- Academic resources and policies>
- Artificial intelligence resources>
- Artificial Intelligence resources for students

Artificial Intelligence resources for students

Overview

NAU encourages students to stay informed about the latest advancements in artificial intelligence, as these tools may play a significant role in their future careers. However, it’s important to understand both the capabilities and limitations of AI, as well as how to utilize AI as an effective companion rather than relying on it entirely.

Guidelines

Permitted use of AI in coursework

NAU encourages the responsible and ethical use of AI in coursework when approved by faculty.1 As a result, guidelines for generative AI may differ between courses, depending on instructor preferences.

Know your instructor’s policy on AI

Before using AI in your coursework, it’s essential to check your course syllabus for any guidelines related to generative AI tools. If AI isn’t explicitly mentioned, ask your instructor for clarification. Open communication ensures you’re aware of any restrictions in place and when you’re able to use AI to enhance your learning.

AI should enhance learning, not replace it

When using generative AI tools in your coursework, aim to use them as a way to enhance your learning or efficiency, not as a shortcut for producing answers or original work. For example, AI can be a helpful tool for proofreading your writing, sorting large data sets, or formatting citations. Don’t use AI to write your discussion posts, essays, or answer questions on your behalf.

Verify information when using AI

While generative AI tools are helpful, it’s important to acknowledge their shortcomings and be aware that current AI technologies aren’t perfect and may produce incorrect information. When using generative AI tools in your coursework, always verify information with a trusted source.

Unethical use of AI

Using generative AI tools when prohibited can lead to disciplinary action and may result in an academic integrity violation.

Adhere to AI usage policies

If your instructor has set guidelines against using AI in your coursework, always respect their policy. Even though AI tools may prove helpful in context, using generative AI when prohibited can lead to major consequences, including academic integrity violations.

Don’t substitute human responses with AI

Don’t use AI to replace your genuine responses and original thoughts. When doing coursework that requires discussion, replies, or responses, you should always strive to express your own ideas and thoughts, not have AI generate answers on your behalf.

Don’t share sensitive information

When using generative AI tools, even the ones approved for use within the university, don’t share any sensitive data. Any data that includes identifiable information, student or course data, or other data that could be harmful if exposed should not be entered into any generative AI tools.

Accommodations and alternatives to AI

Accommodations to AI

Recognizing that personal concerns, preferences, and other factors may make the use of AI tools difficult for some NAU students, instructors are encouraged to offer alternative options for any assignments or tasks that involve AI.

If AI presents a barrier for you or if you prefer not to use it, talk with your instructor to explore alternative ways to complete tasks or coursework that may require using AI.

Generative AI and accessibility

If generative AI tools present difficulties to you due to your accessibility needs, talk to your instructor to talk through alternative options or flexibilities when using generative AI.

If you’re interested in learning more about what accessibility resources or assistive technologies are available to you as an NAU student, contact NAU’s Disability Resource office.

Resources

Microsoft Copilot

Through NAU’s partnership with Microsoft, NAU students can access Copilot, Microsoft’s generative AI chatbot2 at no cost.

Getting started with Microsoft Copilot

To log in to Microsoft Copilot and begin using the service, navigate to Copilot, and when prompted, enter your NAU credentials. Once you’re logged in, you can begin asking Copilot any questions or requests.

Additional resources

-

Academic Integrity

-

Copilot @ NAU

-

Disability resources

-

NAU Review: Welcoming AI into the classroom

1. Suggested methods for using generative AI tools on this page are contingent upon instructor approval. If you’re unsure—always ask your instructor.

2. Microsoft Copilot is a large-language model (LLM) built upon OpenAI’s ChatGPT.
