Responsible Use of Artificial Intelligence (AI) in Assessments
Faculty of Science and Engineering Guidelines for 2023-24 academic year

While technological advances such as AI (including ChatGPT) can be useful in supporting academic
work, e.g. by aiding brainstorming, students are expected to use these responsibly and within the
boundaries of academic integrity.
In general, AI tools such as ChatGPT should not be used in generating the final version of your work
for submission. Any exceptions to this will be clearly stated in the coursework briefing. If you are in
any doubt, speak to the member of staff who is responsible for setting that piece of assessed work.

What can AI be useful for?
•

•
•

AI tools can be valuable for helping set out the parameters of arguments and providing
examples of how to structure different pieces of work; AI can also be used to generate
example code and also explore how other people's code works;
AI can be used for proof-reading and checking for typos;
In some instances, AI can be used to brainstorm ideas and provide inspiration about how to
express points.

What are the limitations of AI?
•
•

AI tools cannot provide you with the specific evidence needed to answer questions and
demonstrate knowledge;
This lack of evidence means that the statements/conclusions AI provides may be (at best)
not relevant and (at worst) entirely incorrect for the piece of assessment you are completing.

What does this mean for me?
•

•

•
•

With the above in mind, AI can be useful in brainstorming ideas, approaches, and structures
to your work. Alongside your academic reading and research, you can leverage AI resources
in the planning phases of your work;
However, you are expected to generate your own assessed work for final submission
(whether the main body of the work being submitted is in a written, graphical or numerical
format);
Often you will be expected to provide critical analysis linking your answer to appropriately
referenced academic literature;
Your submitted work must NOT have been generated using AI tools only, unless this is
explicitly asked for in the assessment briefing.

CONSEQUENCES OF MISUSE:
Utilizing ChatGPT or similar AI tools to generate the assessed work that you submit is considered
plagiarism and a breach of our university's academic offences regulations. Such practices can result
in disciplinary action, up to and including a requirement to withdraw from the university. You can
find the current version of academic regulations and related guidance by clicking here.
