Academic Regulation

ACADEMIC MISCONDUCT POLICY
September 2026

1

Document title
Academic Misconduct Policy
Document author and department
Academic Registry
Approving body
University Education and Student Experience Committee (UESEC) / Academic Council
Date of approval
27 May 2025
Review date
Every three years
Edition no.
2
ID Code
297
Date of effect
01 September 2026

EITHER For public access online (internet)? YES
For public access, on request copy to be mailed? YES
OR For staff access only (intranet)?
Password protected? NO
External queries relating to the document to be referred in the first instance to the
Corporate Governance team: email corporate-governance@port.ac.uk
If you need this document in an alternative format, please email
corporate.communications@port.ac.uk

The latest version of this document is always found at:
https://policies.docstore.port.ac.uk/policy-261.pdf

Contents
Summary ................................................................................................................................................................ 4
1.

Introduction ................................................................................................................................................... 5

2.

What is Academic Misconduct? .................................................................................................................. 11

3.

Reporting Misconduct ................................................................................................................................. 13

4.

Preliminary Assessment .............................................................................................................................. 13

5.

Poor Academic Practice ............................................................................................................................... 14

6.

Formal Process ............................................................................................................................................ 15

7

Appeals ........................................................................................................................................................ 18

8

Review by the OIA ....................................................................................................................................... 19

9

Monitoring and Reporting ........................................................................................................................... 20

10

Records Retention ................................................................................................................................... 20

Appendix A: Definitions........................................................................................................................................ 21
Appendix B: Taxonomy of Misconduct and Sanctions ......................................................................................... 23
Appendix D: Flowcharts ......................................................................................................................................... 1

Summary
What is this document about?
The Academic Misconduct Policy outlines acceptable academic behaviour of students at the
University to ensure the proper functioning of the University.

Who is this for?
This document will be of most interest to new and existing students and University staff. It will also
be of interest to Professional, Statutory and Regulatory Bodies (PSRB’s), the Office for Students, the
Quality Assurance Agency for Higher Education (QAA), and Office of the Independent Adjudicator:
Higher Education (OIAHE). It may also be of interest to the wider public.

How does the University check that this is followed?
Academic Registry is responsible for ensuring that the Policy is followed. A record of all formal
action taken by staff against students is kept by Academic Registry.

Who can you contact if you have any queries about this document?
If you have questions about this document, please contact Academic Registry by email at
studentcasework@port.ac.uk

Accessibility Statement
The Student Conduct Policy is designed to be accessible to all students. If you have any special
needs that mean you are unable to use the Policy in the way set out in this document, please
contact us at studentcasework@port.ac.uk to discuss how the process can be adjusted to fit
your needs, and to receive this Policy in alternative formats.

1. Introduction
1.1.

Key Principles

1.1.1. The University is committed to engaging every student in a life-changing experience allowing them
to fulfil their potential and make a positive contribution to society. The Academic Misconduct Policy
upholds this commitment. Our Student Charter outlines these expectations through five core values:
community, respect, support, education, and opportunity.
1.1.2. Academic integrity 1 is a fundamental part of a student’s studies at the University. Academic
misconduct is any inappropriate activity or behaviour by a student which may give that student, or
another student, an unpermitted academic advantage in a summative assessment. This includes
activity during preparation for assessment, even if there is no direct evidence of misconduct in the
submitted work itself.
1.1.3. This Policy works alongside other key University policies:
●

The Student Conduct Policy - This process should be followed when a student has been
reported to have demonstrated unacceptable behaviour (defined as behaviour that could be
reasonably perceived to cause upset, distress or harm to another person or cause harm to
an organisation).

●

The Assessment Regulations - Our Assessment Regulations are designed to support the
student experience and promote academic success for all students equally, while preserving
academic integrity and safeguarding academic standards.

●

The Fitness to Practise Policy and Procedures apply to the range of regulated programmes
offered by the University that lead to successful students being eligible to seek registration
with the relevant professional, statutory and regulatory body (PSRB). Findings of proven
intent to commit academic misconduct may also be referred to the Fitness to Practise
Procedures.

1.1.4. Schools, Departments and London Campus will provide advice and clear examples to students of
what constitutes academic misconduct. They will inform students of these regulations and the
possible outcomes of academic misconduct.

1 The University has signed up to the QAA Academic Integrity Charter for UK Higher Education. QAA Academic Integrity

Charter

1.1.5. Students have a responsibility to undertake available training, read relevant guidance, and take
responsibility for the integrity of their work, including asking for clarification when needed.
1.1.6. This policy applies the University's Code of Practice on Freedom of Speech and Expression and
supports the principles of academic freedom as defined in the Education Reform Act 1988. The Code
sets out the University’s approach to freedom of speech and academic freedom, its value to the
University, and how the University promotes and secures those rights for members of its
community. The University upholds both the principles of academic freedom and inclusion. While
the University encourages respectful and informed approaches to diverse topics, academic staff
retain the right to present evidence-based research, theories, and scholarly viewpoints on all
subjects, including those related to protected characteristics under the Equality Act 2010. Course
content should aim to represent diverse perspectives, while preserving the academic freedom to
explore challenging or contested topics through rigorous scholarly discourse (Protected academic
expression). Where potential tensions may arise between creating inclusive environments and
protecting freedom of expression, the University will seek to enable both by focusing on the manner
of expression rather than restricting legitimate content. The University is committed to facilitating
difficult conversations while ensuring respect for all community members.
1.1.7. The University investigates all reports of misconduct using the same process. Under the Policy, the
standard of proof is the “balance of probabilities.” This means that, following an investigation into
misconduct, the University can decide whether it believes that something is more likely to have
happened than not, based on the evidence available. This does not require certainty but rather a
reasonable belief, based on the evidence, that misconduct has occurred.
1.1.8. The outcomes of investigations and Panels under this Policy are generally final; however, the
University will, on occasion, reopen an investigation if new evidence emerges that could not have
been obtained sooner or if there are outstanding obligations relating to professional regulatory
requirements.
1.1.9. In exceptional circumstances, the Academic Council may deprive any person of any award granted by
the University, on the recommendation of the Vice-Chancellor or the relevant Board of Examiners.
1.1.10. Confirmed instances of academic misconduct and any sanction imposed may be referred to in
student references and may be reported to relevant approving bodies for professional courses.

1.1.11. Academic judgement is “a judgement that is made about a matter where the opinion of an academic
expert is essential” (OIA, 2018). Disagreement with academic judgement is not, in itself, grounds for
appeal.
i) Decisions that involve academic judgement: Academic staff conducting misconduct
investigations will evaluate evidence within assessed work to determine, on the balance of
probabilities, whether misconduct occurred, its nature, and extent. These evaluations
constitute exercises of academic judgement.
ii) Decisions not normally requiring academic judgement: After determining the nature and
extent of misconduct, the appropriate sanction from Appendix B should be applied- this
typically does not involve academic judgement. Establishing factual matters based on
evidence generally does not require academic judgement.
1.1.12. Artificial Intelligence: The University permits the use of AI as a tool to assist and inform research and
generation of ideas, planning and output. The use of AI in submitted work must adhere to principles
of academic integrity, with proper citation and clear indication of where AI has been utilised. Failure
to do so will be considered for academic misconduct action. Guidance can be found in the
University’s use of AI statement document.
1.1.13. As a general principle, the consequences for academic misconduct will depend on the severity of the
offence, any previous incidents of academic misconduct, and any additional mitigating or
aggravating factors.
1.1.14. Additional supporting information for students is available on the Student Casework team’s MyPort
pages.

1.2.

Scope

1.2.1. This Policy applies to all registered University students, no matter the course, its campus/location,
level or mode of study.
1.2.2. Where a University award is delivered by a collaborative educational partner, the partner is expected
to operate an appropriate and equivalent policy and procedures. The specific arrangements,
including the division of responsibilities between the University and the partner and the
identification of the final stage of each process, are agreed through the partner and course approval
process and set out in the relevant partner operational handbook.

1.2.3. This Policy may apply after students have left the University.
1.2.4. Allegations pertaining to assessments from previous academic years can be investigated
retrospectively, provided there is compelling evidence to justify the investigation.
1.2.5. This Policy may also apply to work produced as part of a student’s programme of study that has not
yet been formally submitted for summative assessment. This includes, but is not limited to, draft
work, formative submissions, and research outputs such as dissertation or thesis chapters. A concern
may arise where such work is presented for academic review, feedback, or progression purposes,
including supervision, formative assessment, or formal progression points.
1.2.6. Where concerns arise in relation to draft or formative work, the University will normally address
these through supervisory or educational processes in the first instance. Formal action under this
Policy will be initiated only where there is evidence of significant or intentional academic
misconduct, or where informal resolution is not appropriate.

1.3.

Exclusions

1.3.1. This Policy does not cover:

1.4.

●

Behavioural misconduct (covered by the Student Conduct Policy).

●

Research misconduct (covered by the Research Misconduct procedure).

Rights of Students

1.4.1. Students suspected of academic misconduct have the right to:
●

Confidential advice and support throughout the process.

●

Fair treatment and respect.

●

Timely processing of their case.

●

Access to all evidence considered in their case.

●

Clear information about the process.

1.4.2. Students with additional needs as defined by the Equality Act 2010 are entitled to reasonable
adjustments to the procedure. Examples include:
●

Extended deadlines for responses.

●

Alternative format documentation.

●

Communication support in meetings.

●

Assistance with understanding procedures.

●

Adjustments to meeting format or location.

●

Breaks during panel hearings.

To request reasonable adjustments, students should contact the Investigator or the Student
Casework team as early as possible in the process.
1.4.3. All deadlines within this Policy should be met by both students and the University whenever
possible, but it may be possible to continue outside of the timelines given if there are acceptable
reasons for the delay.
1.4.4. Students are entitled to meet with the Student Casework team at any point during a conduct case
for advice or to discuss procedural adjustments.
1.4.5. Students who receive an academic misconduct sanction remain subject to standard University
regulations regarding referral assessments and mark capping, unless explicitly stated otherwise.

1.5.

Support

1.5.1. The Student Life team is available to support any students involved in misconduct cases of any
nature. The support offer includes navigational support to help students engage with the relevant
services in an efficient and timely manner, and welfare support.
1.5.2. Students involved in procedures under this Policy are encouraged to make use of the Students’
Union Advice Service for independent support and advice at all stages of the Policy, including access
to representation.
1.5.3. Students may bring a supporter to meetings. This can be a friend or family member, a UPSU Advice
Representative or someone else nominated by the student. It is always helpful to inform the meeting
host of this as soon as possible, so arrangements can be made to accommodate this. At the meeting,
your supporter may make a statement to us and ask questions but should not answer questions on
your behalf. You may talk privately with your supporter at any time during the meeting and may ask
for a brief adjournment to do so.
1.5.4. Legal representatives are not required. If a student wishes to bring a legal representative, they must
notify the University in advance, and the University may arrange legal representation for its staff as a
result.

1.5.5. The Student Wellbeing Service is available to support students and provide free mental health
wellbeing and counselling support.
1.5.6. Chaplaincy is available for support, guidance and confidential one-to-one chats, and is open to all
students, regardless of the student’s values or beliefs.

1.6.

Expectations of All Parties

1.6.1. All parties must treat each other with dignity and respect. The University retains the right, where we
consider the actions of anyone involved in a case to be unacceptable, to depart from the procedure.
The University needs to ensure that all those involved do not suffer any disadvantage from
individuals who act in an unacceptable manner. Restrictions may include:
●

Modifying the manner in which individuals are permitted to communicate with us including
termination of any interview if unacceptable behaviour persists following a warning.

●

Restricting the right to communicate with us, both now and in the future.

●

The Student Casework Team may also raise the matter as a disciplinary issue under the
Student Conduct Policy.

1.6.2. Recording of discussions is not permitted without express permission from all parties.

1.7.

Confidentiality

1.7.1. The person carrying out an investigation needs to be able to communicate and discuss the suspected
misconduct with everyone involved. It is for this reason that we will not generally investigate
anonymous reports of academic misconduct, although each case will be determined on its own
merits by the Student Casework Team.
1.7.2. Investigation details will be shared only with those who need to know. Staff involved in the case will
handle all correspondence sensitively and will only reveal the information necessary to each member
of staff or student as appropriate.
1.7.3. Following disciplinary procedures, only relevant parties will be informed of the outcome. In the
majority of cases of academic misconduct, this will be the Student Casework team, Academic
Services (who process any sanction) the student, any complainant, the student’s Head of School (or
equivalent) and the Associate Dean (Academic) (or equivalent). Relevant support services will be
informed if they are asked to accept a referral from the student.

1.7.4. The University expects all those involved in a misconduct case at any stage of this Policy to respect
the confidentiality of the Policy. The University will only breach the confidentiality of this Policy if
there is a clear lawful basis for doing so, particularly if the safety of students, staff or the general
public is at risk.

1.8.

Equality, Diversity and Inclusion

1.8.1. We are committed to an inclusive process free from discrimination. Our Policy is designed to be fair,
transparent and accessible to everyone, regardless of their race, ethnicity, gender, sexual
orientation, religion, age, disability, or any other characteristic protected by law.
1.8.2. We recognise that individuals from different backgrounds and identities may experience barriers to
participating effectively in misconduct cases. We commit to handling all allegations with sensitivity,
impartiality and respect, while actively addressing any issues related to inequality, bias or
discrimination that may arise.
1.8.3. To discuss any ways we can better support you to engage with this process, please contact the
Student Casework team.

2. What is Academic Misconduct?
2.1

Definitions

2.1.1. Academic Misconduct is defined by the OIA (2018), as: “Any action by a student which gives or has
the potential to give an unfair advantage in an examination or assessment or might assist someone
else to gain an unfair advantage, or any activity likely to undermine the integrity essential to
scholarship and research.”
2.1.2.

Examples of academic misconduct given by the OIA (2018) and recognised by this Policy include:
●

Plagiarism - presenting someone else’s work or ideas as the student’s own.

●

Self-plagiarism - submitting work that is the same or substantially the same as work that the
student has already submitted for another assessment when this is not permitted.

●

Taking a copy of another student’s work without their permission.

●

Falsifying data, evidence or experimental results.

●

Collusion - working with someone else on an assessment which is intended to be the
student’s own work.

●

Contract cheating - where someone completes work for a student who then submits it as
their own (including the use of essay mills or buying work online).

●

Arranging for someone else to impersonate a student by sitting their examination.

●

Cheating in examinations (or other formal assessments), including possession of
unauthorised material or technology during an examination, and attempting to access
unseen assessment materials in advance of an examination.

●

Submitting fraudulent extenuating circumstances claims or falsifying evidence in support of
extenuating circumstances claims (this may also be considered a non-academic disciplinary
matter).

●

Breaches of research and ethics policies relating to undergraduate or postgraduate taught
courses- e.g. carrying out research without appropriate permission.

●

Improper use of generative AI (see 1.1.12)

2.1.3. Academic misconduct may occur in work that has been formally submitted for assessment, or in
work produced or shared as part of the learning or research process, including draft or formative
work.
2.1.4. In the case of postgraduate research students, issues identified within draft work will normally be
considered as part of the supervisory process and addressed through guidance and development.
Minor or developmental issues will not normally constitute Poor Academic Practice or Academic
Misconduct.
2.1.5. Formal consideration under this Policy will only arise where there is evidence of a significant breach
of academic integrity, repeated concerns that have not been addressed through supervision, or clear
evidence of deliberate intent to mislead.
2.1.6. The University recognises that legitimate research on controversial, sensitive, or challenging topics
forms an essential part of academic inquiry. The pursuit of knowledge may sometimes involve
engaging with materials or viewpoints that some may find offensive or disturbing. Where such
research is conducted with appropriate ethical approval, methodological rigour, and in accordance
with scholarly norms, it will be protected from misconduct allegations based solely on its subject
matter.
2.1.7. It is not necessary to prove intention to commit academic misconduct to make a finding of academic
misconduct. However, proof of a lack of intent to commit misconduct is likely to be considered a
mitigating factor when determining the outcome. Similarly, proven intent to commit academic

misconduct is likely to be considered an aggravating factor when determining a sanction. Examples
of proven intent include, but are not limited to:
●

False authorship or impersonation.

●

Falsifying data.

●

Falsifying content or evidence as part of an extenuating circumstance claim.

●

Accessing any unauthorised websites (including Moodle) during an examination.

●

Taking or accessing unauthorised, concealed, or pre-prepared materials into an examination
and where the materials are potentially relevant to the examination.

2.1.8. Academic judgement will be applied when identifying suspected cases of academic misconduct, with
detection methods varying based on the assessment type.

3. Reporting Misconduct
3.1

Disciplinary action against a student may be initiated by any member of staff, or student at the
University, or by anyone involved in the student’s provision of work-based learning, training or
placement opportunity, including patient/service users.

3.2

Suspected academic misconduct should be reported to the relevant Head of School or Department
or equivalent within 10 working days of discovery.

3.3

Complainants should have a reasonable cause to believe that academic misconduct may have
occurred. They should identify sufficient evidence to substantiate their reasonable cause. Reports
should include:
i.

The nature of the suspected misconduct.

ii.

Available evidence.

iii.

Course and module details.

iv.

Student information (if known).

4. Preliminary Assessment
4.1

Within 15 working days of receiving a report, the Head (or equivalent) or their nominated
representative will conduct a preliminary assessment to:
●

Review the report and relevant assessment materials.

●

Determine if there is sufficient evidence to proceed.

●
4.2

Classify the potential misconduct.

Where the concern relates to draft or formative work, the preliminary assessment will include

consideration of whether the matter is more appropriately addressed through supervisory or educational
processes rather than formal action under this Policy.
4.3

4.4

4.5

Possible outcomes of preliminary assessment:
●

No evidence of academic misconduct - no further action.

●

Potential Poor Academic Practice - refer to Section 5.

●

Potential academic misconduct requiring formal investigation - refer to Section 6.

In making this determination, the Head (or representative) or equivalent will consider:
●

The nature and extent of the alleged misconduct.

●

The student's academic level and previous record.

●

Whether the case meets the criteria for Poor Academic Practice (see Section 4.7-9).

The Poor Academic Practice process may be undertaken when all the following criteria are met:
•

The affected assessment(s) in this instance are worth no more than 30 credits; and

•

In the Head’s (or representative’s) opinion, the extent of the offence identified is minor; and

•

The student has not previously followed the Poor Academic Practice process for an instance
of Academic Misconduct.

4.6

It is likely that cases falling under this severity will be offences such as incorrect use of referencing or
an omission to reference, seemingly genuine mistakes, undue haste or academic inexperience (for
example, at an early stage in an undergraduate degree programme).

4.7

It may be evident that genuine cultural issues appear to be involved, and where there is doubt that
the student has fully understood what constitutes academic misconduct.

4.8

A case cannot be considered Poor Academic Practice where the student has a pattern of previous,
similar offences.

4.9

Where the Head (or representative) decides to initiate the Poor Academic Practice process, or the
Formal Investigation process, the student will be notified within 5 working days of the decision being
made.

5. Poor Academic Practice
5.1

Poor academic practice refers to low-level breaches of academic integrity, often stemming from a
lack of understanding of proper academic conventions or a failure to take adequate care to follow
assessment guidelines. It typically involves unintentional misconduct like inadequate referencing or
poor paraphrasing, rather than a deliberate attempt to deceive or gain an unfair advantage.

5.2

Where Poor Academic Practice is identified, the student will be invited to a meeting with the
Associate Head (Students), or equivalent, or their nominated representative, who will explain the
nature of the concern.

5.3

This will be a formative learning opportunity for the student who will be given advice and will be
signposted to relevant support and educational opportunities regarding good academic practice. The
student may be required to undertake an academic integrity learning activity.

5.4

There should be no sanctions given for this category; the response is supportive and ensures that the
student complies with an educational process to raise their academic practice.

5.5

In these cases, the mark awarded should be based on an academic judgement of the quality of the
work overall. The outcome will be determined via the standard marking processes and the work
marked against the assessment criteria only.

5.6

The student will be informed that if poor academic practice occurs in the future, it will be dealt with
by a formal investigation, and associated sanctions will be imposed.

5.7

The Associate Head (Students), or equivalent, will complete a record of the meeting using a standard
form which will outline the advice given. A copy will be given to the student.

6. Formal Process
6.1 Investigation
6.1.1. The Head (or equivalent) or their nominated representative shall appoint an Investigator who:
•

Has no previous involvement in the case.

•

Has received appropriate training in the academic misconduct procedure.

•

Is independent of the student's teaching team when possible.

•

Has declared no conflict of interest in the case.

6.1.2. The Investigator will determine:
i.

Whether (on the balance of probabilities) academic misconduct has taken place.

ii.

Whether (on the balance of probabilities) it was the reported student(s) who were
responsible for this academic misconduct.

iii.

Whether there were any factors for consideration which resulted in the academic
misconduct.

iv.

Whether the investigation will consider Professional Statutory and Regulatory Body
expectations associated with the Student’s course.

6.1.3. The investigation must be carried out as quickly as possible and should, normally, be completed
within 30 working days of the start date. If, in rare cases, the investigation cannot be completed
within that time, students must be informed of the new deadline and reasons for the delay in
writing.
6.1.4. The Investigator will:
i.

Invite the reported student to a meeting with clear information about the process (see
6.1.5).

ii.

Interview or correspond with other relevant witnesses.

iii.

Produce a report of findings.

6.1.5. The reported student will receive the following information in advance of any meeting with the
Investigator:
i.

Details of the alleged breach and scope of the investigation.

ii.

Details as to how the investigation will be undertaken.

iii.

Any supporting evidence of the alleged breach.

iv.

A copy of the Academic Misconduct Policy.

v.

Details of, and offer to make a referral to, additional support services available to the
student.

vi.

Right to be accompanied at the meeting by a Supporter who could be a student/staff union
representative, colleague, or a family member or friend.

6.1.6. On the conclusion of all meetings, the notes of the meeting will be shared with the attendees to
check for matters of factual accuracy.
6.1.7. Meetings can be held in person or virtually, and reasonable adjustments can be applied as necessary.

6.1.8. If the reported student(s) fail to attend the meeting without good reason, the Investigator may
proceed in their absence.
6.1.9. The possible outcomes of the investigation include:
•

The student has not been considered to be in breach of the Policy, and the matter will be
closed.

•

The student has been considered to be in breach of the Policy, and the matter can be
resolved at this stage with the imposition of a minor or moderate sanction (see Appendix B)
which will include a referral to additional support and guidance.

•

The student has been considered to be in breach of the Policy, and a Panel should be
convened to consider if a major sanction is appropriate.

6.1.10 The investigation report will be shared with the reported student and that student’s Head of School
(or equivalent) as well as the Student Casework team.

6.2 Panel
6.2.1

Where a Panel is required, the Investigator submits the investigation report and a Panel request to
the Student Casework team, who will determine if the request is valid.

6.2.2

The Academic Registrar or nominee may direct that a Panel is not appropriate at any time before the
issue of the Panel Decision Notice. If this is the case, written reasoning will be provided to all parties.

6.2.3

If the request is valid, the Student Casework team will give notice of this to all those involved within
10 working days of receipt of the investigation report.

6.2.4

The Student Casework team will then, within 30 working days of the notice issued at 6.2.3, appoint
and schedule a Panel and Secretary of members with no previous involvement in the matter, and
who have declared that they do not have a conflict of interest in relation to the case. The Panel will
have a quoracy of three members consisting of:

6.2.5

•

A member of the Academic Council or its subcommittees or an Authorised Person as Chair.

•

A senior academic or professional services staff member.

•

A representative nominated by the Students’ Union.

Where required, the Panel membership may be expanded to include any additional member(s)
where required by the relevant Professional Statutory and Regulatory Body associated with the
student’s course of study, or to include specialist/expert staff from other areas of the University.

6.2.6

The Panel and the reported student will be given at least 10 working days' notice of the Panel,
including the following information:

6.2.7

i.

A copy of the Investigation Report.

ii.

The date, time and venue of the meeting.

iii.

Details of where help and advice may be sought.

iv.

A copy of any evidence that will be considered.

v.

Details of a student’s right to bring a Supporter to the Panel.

vi.

The right to request reasonable adjustments.

If the reported student is unable to attend (physically or virtually) they can submit a written
statement of case in advance by email to studentcasework@port.ac.uk which will be considered at
the Panel meeting.

6.2.8

The Panel will consider the evidence and form a conclusion based on the balance of probability. The
possible outcomes of the Panel are:
•

No breach of the Policy has been demonstrated, and the case will be closed.

•

The student has been considered to be in breach of the Policy, and the Panel shall decide
whether to impose one or more sanctions at any level.

6.2.9

Following the meeting, the Panel will communicate in writing to the student and the Investigator a
Decision Notice, copied to the student’s Head of School. The notice shall consist of the following:
i.

A summary of the major points made during the meeting.

ii.

A concise statement of the Panel’s findings.

iii.

Justification of the decision reached, and the sanctions imposed, including the assessment of
fairness and proportionality.

iv.

In the case of any finding that a student’s behaviour is unacceptable, the actions required
and the arrangements for the application of any sanction.

v.

An explanation of the student’s right of appeal.

vi.

Appropriate support available for the student.

6.2.10 The Panel will communicate in writing where appropriate to the Professional Statutory and
Regulatory Body associated with the student’s course, following the conclusion of the process.

7

Appeals

7.1

Students may appeal within 10 working days of receiving a decision. We recommend students use
this time to seek advice from the sources listed in section 1.5 above before submitting their appeal;
however, students can submit their appeal at any time during these 10 working days, particularly if
they need an urgent decision.

7.2

The grounds for appeal are as follows:
i.

There has been a procedural irregularity in the conduct of the disciplinary process.

ii.

New material evidence is available which was not previously reasonably available.

iii.

The decision made was unreasonable, and/or the sanction imposed was disproportionate to
the disciplinary offence.

7.3

The Academic Registrar or nominated representative, who has had no previous involvement in the
case, will consider the appeal within 10 working days and will advise the student whether valid
grounds for appeal have been established.

7.4

Where, in the opinion of the Academic Registrar or nominee, a valid ground for appeal has been
established, the Student Casework team will convene an Appeal Panel, consisting of members with
no previous involvement in the matter and who have declared no conflict of interest. The Appeal
Panel will have a quorum of three, and members must be eligible to take part in a Panel as set out at
section 6.2.4 above.

7.5

The Appeal Panel will reconsider the case and is entitled to overturn the decision of the original
Panel. This will take place as soon as possible and normally within 30 working days of the decision of
the Academic Registrar. If the Appeal Panel does not uphold the appeal, the decision of the Panel
will stand there will be no further opportunities for appeal, and the University’s internal procedures
are completed. Students will be issued with a Completion of Procedures letter at this point.

7.6

Where, in the opinion of the Academic Registrar or nominee, no valid ground for appeal has been
established, the decision of the Panel will stand and there will be no further opportunities for appeal.
The Student Casework team will reject the request and will write to the reported student to inform
them of this decision. Students will be issued with a Completion of Procedures letter at this point.

8

Review by the OIA

8.1

Students will receive details of how to apply to the Office of the Independent Adjudicator for Higher
Education (OIA) in the Completion of Procedures letter issued by the Academic Registry and will
have 12 months to do so.

9

Monitoring and Reporting

9.1

Annual reports on conduct cases are submitted to University leadership and the Students' Union for
their information and to consider and recommend action on any university-wide issues arising from
conduct cases, including:
•

Number of cases considered suitable for the Poor Academic Practice process.

•

Number and outcomes of cases investigated and the number and outcomes of Panels.

•

Number of cases with academic freedom considerations and the outcomes of these cases,
along with actions taken to monitor any “chilling effect” caused by conduct cases.

9.2

•

Appeals and their outcomes.

•

Actions taken.

•

Equality monitoring statistics.

The University gathers and reviews annual data from its education partners as part of the annual
reporting cycle. The University considers this information to provide oversight of partner provision,
identify themes and areas for improvement, and agree any necessary actions with the partner.

10 Records Retention
10.1

Documents relating to conduct cases are kept for six years following resolution, in line with the
University's Retention Schedule.

Appendix A: Definitions
Academic Registrar
The Academic Registrar or any member of staff delegated by the Academic Registrar to act on their
behalf.

Authorised Person
The Authorised Person is any person who has responsibility for Panel attendance or for the informal
process under this procedure.

Balance of probabilities
A standard of proof in which a decision is made following an objective assessment of the evidence of
whether it is more likely than not that an alleged incident occurred.

Exclusion
The cancellation of a student’s registration, where they will no longer be a member of the University and will
not be able to complete their studies or access the University campus or other services, is effective
immediately.

Investigator
The Investigator is any person who is appointed to investigate under the formal process. The role and
functions of the Investigator are undertaken by appropriately trained individuals appointed by the
University.

Office of the Independent Adjudicator (OIA)
An independent body set up to review student complaints about Higher Education Providers in England and
Wales. It provides students with the opportunity of an independent review of their complaint or appeal once
the University’s internal procedures have been followed and completed.

Poor Academic Practice
Poor academic practice refers to minor breaches of academic integrity, often stemming from a lack of
understanding of proper academic conventions or a failure to follow assessment guidelines. It typically
involves unintentional mistakes like inadequate referencing or poor paraphrasing, rather than a deliberate
attempt to deceive or gain an unfair advantage.

Procedural Irregularity
Procedural irregularity means the University has not acted in accordance with its own regulations or
procedures or has not acted with procedural fairness.

Protected academic expression.
Examples of protected academic expression may include scholarly analysis of, e.g. gender theory; critique of
theoretical frameworks; respectful debate on legal or policy issues related to protected characteristics; or
teaching materials that present diverse viewpoints on controversial issues. These contrast with prohibited
behaviours such as directing slurs at individuals; refusing to use agreed names or pronouns in direct
communication; persistently targeting individuals for their protected characteristics; or creating a hostile
environment through a pattern of behaviour targeting individuals rather than ideas.

Representative / Supporter
The Representative is defined as a person who may represent the Responding Student during the process
and make representations on their behalf. A Supporter is someone who attends the meeting alongside the
reported student for the purposes of supporting them.

Student
Any person currently registered for a programme of study or module(s) and who has registered as a student
on that programme at the University, whether the mode of study is full-time, part-time, sandwich, or as a
research student. Students at collaborative partners of the University will be subject to these procedures for
Academic Misconduct but will be subject to the local rules relating to general student misconduct for the
collaborative partner. Under this Policy, references to “student” mean a student at the University who is
reported under this Policy for suspected misconduct.

Suspension
Involves either total or selective restriction on attendance at or access to the University, including
placement arrangements. The exact details of any suspension will be communicated in writing.

Vice-Chancellor
The Vice-Chancellor or any member of staff delegated by the Vice-Chancellor to act on her/his behalf.

Witness
The Witness is defined as a person who has witnessed a Student’s alleged misconduct or otherwise
has relevant information about the suspected misconduct. A Witness is not restricted to someone to
whom misconduct was directed.

Working day
Monday to Friday, not including Bank Holidays, nor the period that the University is closed over the
Christmas period.

Appendix B: Taxonomy of Misconduct and Sanctions
1.1.

Where a breach of the Policy is proven, the University will apply one or more sanctions.

1.2.

Only a Panel can apply a major sanction, but Panels will be able to apply the full range of
sanctions as appropriate.

1.3.

A student’s previous disciplinary record will not normally be relevant to whether they have
committed an offence. However, it is likely to be relevant to decisions about convening a
Panel and to decisions on sanctions. The Student Casework team will advise Panels on any
relevant previous disciplinary offences only once a breach of the Policy is proven.

1.4.

The Student Casework team will also advise the decision makers of relevant precedents
relating to similar cases, whilst recognising that each case must be considered on its own
merits.

1.5.

In matching an offence to a level of sanction, the decision maker must consider the full range
of sanctions available at that level and must only apply a higher sanction than the lowest
available if there is a good reason that the lower sanctions are insufficient, which must be
documented.

1.6.

Mitigating and aggravating factors may include (but are not limited to) consideration of the
following.
•

Whether it is a first or further offence.

•

Where the impact of imposing a sanction on a student’s progression or award would be
disproportionate.

1.7.

•

The extent of the potential advantage to the student.

•

The presence of significant and applicable extenuating circumstances.

•

The extent of the intent to deceive.

•

Where the University’s reputation has been damaged by the actions of the individual.

Moderate offences: behaviour which would have deceived the marker and/or could have
gained an unfair advantage for the student. There is a clear intent to deceive; however, the
extent of the action is limited in scope and impact. It is likely that cases falling under this
severity will be some deliberate plagiarism or self-plagiarism that is not extensive, or minor
collusion.

1.8.

Major offences: more serious cases of academic misconduct that would significantly
undermine the assessment process and give a clear advantage to the student. Cases may
involve evidence of extensive academic misconduct, repeated incidents of academic
misconduct or with a clear and obvious intent to deceive. It is likely that cases falling under
this severity will be extensive plagiarism or self-plagiarism, fabrication of data, extensive
cheating in an examination, extensive collusion, impersonation, or contract cheating.

Table of misconduct and sanctions
1.9.

As above, all acts of misconduct and sanctions are provided as illustrations of what may
typically be considered under each level of misconduct. This is not meant to be an exhaustive
list and must be considered in the situational context.

Minor/Moderate Misconduct

Sanctions

First/low-level instances of:

•

•

Plagiarism.

•

Collusion.

•

Breach of examination rules.

•

Falsifying extenuating circumstances

•

Failure to provide an electronic copy when

record for 12 months.
•

Mark for assessment reduced to module pass
threshold where the original mark is above the
threshold.

•

The student is expected to undertake training
to ensure that future occurrences do not arise.

asked.
•

Warning issued to student - held on their

The late return of equipment loaned by a
Faculty or Department, which is required by

PGR students only:

other students to complete an assessment.
•

Inappropriate use of generative AI.

•

Correction and resubmission of affected work
(e.g. chapter, portfolio)

PGR specific misconduct:

•

Requirement to repeat a milestone (e.g.
upgrade / annual review)

●

Isolated issues in draft or developmental work

●

Limited impact on originality/validity

•

●

Likely misunderstanding (e.g. referencing,

N.B. Support for better academic practice must

early AI misuse)

also be provided

Moderate Misconduct

Delayed progression decision

Sanctions

•

Repeated or extensive minor offence, such as

•

substantial plagiarism or cheating in an
•

Warning issued to student - held on their
record until completion of their current course.

examination.

•

Mark for assessment reduced to zero.

Purchase of an online assessment (first

•

Student required to undertake training to

offence)
PGR specific misconduct:
●

Repeated issues or substantive concerns
about authorship/originality

●

ensure that future occurrences do not arise.
PGR students only:
•

amendments

Inappropriate handling of sources, data, or AI
affecting integrity.

Referral at pre‑viva stage with required

•

Repeat of progression milestone

•

Significant delay to progression or submission

Major Misconduct: always escalated to a Panel

Sanctions

•

Repeated moderate offence (including further

•

Mark for the relevant module reduced to zero.

repeated minor offences)

•

Mark for the whole year reduced to zero.

•

The student is excluded from the University.

PGR specific misconduct:
●

Extensive fabrication, falsification, or
systematic plagiarism

●

Clear intent to deceive or gain academic

PGR students only:
•

Fail of submission (e.g. thesis or progression
outcome)

advantage.

•

Requirement to withdraw or substantially
revise work.

Appendix D: Flowcharts
Poor Academic Practice

Formal Process

Panel

Appeal
