AI tools like Copilot and ChatGPT are becoming a part of everyday life and work — and studying. As well as understanding how to use these tools, you need to know what is and isn't okay in your university assignments.

Can I use AI in my university work?

The short answer is yes — but you must acknowledge when and how you've used AI in your assignments.

We want you to feel confident and supported in using AI responsibly and effectively. By learning to use it ethically and creatively now, you’ll prepare yourself for a world where human skills and digital tools work together.

But you must acknowledge how you've used AI in any submissions or assessments. Find out how to do this below.

What AI tools are there?

There are a wide range of generative AI tools out there, with some available for free and others which need a subscription.

As a University of Portsmouth student you can access Microsoft Copilot, a generative AI assistant which can help you with a range of tasks from research to planning, and more.

We encourage you to explore and use Copilot responsibly and ethically to support your learning.

Using AI during your studies

Learning to use AI responsibly is important for you as a student, and for your future employers.

As a University of Portsmouth student you'll have access to Microsoft 365. This includes Copilot — a generative AI assistant designed to help you with a wide range of tasks and questions.

We want you to be confident in using and these AI tools, and in submitting work that remains your own throughout your studies.

Learn more about using AI at uni, and how to declare what you've used, in our video or check out our FAQs below.

View transcript

[Using AI at University]

[Prof. Ale Armellini, Dead of Education and Digital Innovation]

Artificial Intelligence tools like ChatGPT and Copilot are becoming part of everyday life and work.

[AI in Everyday Life]

[AI is everywhere]

[Free Microsoft Copilot]

[Modern study and work]

At the University of Portsmouth you have free access to Microsoft 365, which includes Copilot, a generative AI assistant designed to support a wide range of tasks.

[What AI helps with]

[Generates ideas, plan, improve, explore, manage time]

AI can help you generate ideas, plan projects, improve writing, explore complex topics and manage your time.

[Why AI Skills Matter]

[Future-ready skills, digital confidence, Humans and AI together]

Using AI well now helps prepare you for a workplace where human judgement and digital tools complement each other.

We want you to feel confident using AI responsibly while making sure your work remains your own.

[Responsible Use]

[Your work must be your own]

[AI acknowledgment form in ever assessment]

That’s why every summative assessment in Moodle now includes an AI acknowledgment form. The golden rule is “Own what you submit”.

[Own what you submit]

[What the AI Acknowledgement Form is]

[If/how AI supported you]

[Fairness and trust]

This simple form enables you to acknowledge whether, and if so how, AI has supported your work. It gives you an opportunity to explain the role it played in your learning. This helps your lecturers understand your approach and supports fairness and trust across the University.

[Why the Form Matters]

The form is important. If it is not completed, or not completed accurately, lecturers may need to contact you about your submission. You must not use AI to do the work for you.

[What not to do]

Submitting AI generated work as your own is academic misconduct. You may be asked to discuss your work to demonstrate your understanding.

[Own what you submit]

“Own what you submit” is the golden rule. AI should help you learn, not learn for you.

[Key takeaways; use AI responsibly, complete the AI acknowledgement form honestly]

Use it responsibly, complete the acknowledgment form honestly, and make sure your work always reflects your own unique thinking, understanding and the skills you have developed while studying at university.

[University of Portsmouth Centre for Academic and Digital Innovation]

Acknowledging AI use in Moodle

You need to acknowledge whenever you use AI to help with an assessment you completed during your own time.

To let your lecturers know that you used AI as part of the assignment, you'll use the summative assessment dropbox in Moodle and tell us how you used AI to help you. This information (known as your declaration) is recorded in Moodle and linked to your submission so that staff can report on AI usage as well as other information.

Follow our guide below, or email [email protected] if you have any questions about the process.

How to acknowledge your AI use

1. Select whether you used AI

When you submit your assignment in Moodle, you'll choose a checkbox to either state you did or did not use AI in the assessment.

If you state you did not use AI, then you can click 'Submit Response'.

If you skip this dropbox, you can submit the assignment but it won't have an attached declaration, which may be reported.

2. Tell us how you used AI

If you state that you did use AI, you should use the dropdown to select one or more of the following options to confirm how you used AI in your work:

- Data analysis: using AI to analyse data sets or interpret results

- Developing ideas: generating or refining concepts, arguments, or structures

- Getting feedback on my work: using AI to review drafts and suggest improvements

- Identifying themes: extracting key themes or patterns from content or notes

- Improving flow and legibility: enhancing clarity, structure, or readability

- Proofreading, grammar checking etc.: correcting spelling, punctuation, or grammar

- Research/information gathering: locating, summarising, or explaining information

- Other (please specify): declaring any additional type of AI use not covered above

If you select the 'Other' option, you'll explain exactly how you used AI in the 'Other AI usage' text box.

Once you've completed this step, click 'Submit Response'. You'll then see a confirmation note summarising what you have declared, and have the option to edit this declaration if you need to.

When you're ready, submit your assessment.

Why do we acknowledge AI use in assessments?

Being open about your use of AI helps your tutors to understand how you approach your work, and to maintain trust and fairness in assessment.

FAQs

Close all

Why does AI matter?

Using AI well can help you generate ideas, plan projects, improve writing, explore complex topics, and prepare for your future career. It can also help you with administrative tasks and time management.

What does the University expect of you?

We want to help you understand where AI can support your learning and how your own thinking, understanding, creativity and originality should be evidenced. The goal isn’t to ban AI or ‘catch you out’, but to make sure your work remains your own.

When is it appropriate to use AI?

AI can be a great study partner if used wisely. You might use it to:

-

Generate ideas or brainstorm topics

-

Clarify difficult concepts

-

Check grammar or structure

-

Explore examples or case studies

-

Get feedback on drafts, with your own judgement applied. You may use this feedback to inform and enhance your work. Critically, the work must remain yours, and you should be able to demonstrate full understanding and ownership of what you submit.

When is it not appropriate to use AI?

You must not AI if you have been told not to do so in the assessment brief. You must not use AI to write or complete your assignments for you. Claiming AI-generated work to be your own is academic misconduct. The principle is simple: you must be able to show mastery of what you submit. Your tutors may ask you to discuss your work in person to assess your understanding of what you submitted.

What support is available?

The University offers workshops, examples and short guides to help you learn how to use AI effectively and responsibly. You can find out about using Microsoft 365 Copilot on MyPort. You can also find skill development learning packages on LinkedIn Learning.

Remember: AI should help you learn, not learn for you. Use it responsibly, stay curious, and keep your learning authentic.

Enable University alerts

Turn on notifications for critical updates like closures, safety alerts, and urgent service disruptions.

Enable

Maybe later
