Reconsidering assessment for the
ChatGPT era: QAA advice on developing
sustainable assessment strategies

Scope and purpose of this advice
This paper sets out QAA’s advice for providers on how to approach the assessment of students in
a world where students have access to Generative Artificial Intelligence (AI) tools. The principles
set out here are applicable to both higher and further education. This resource develops a theme
first introduced in our earlier advice - Maintaining quality and standards in the ChatGPT era: QAA
advice on the opportunities and challenges posed by Generative Artificial Intelligence - published
in May 2023, around the (re)design of assessment strategies to mitigate the risks to academic
integrity posed by the increased use of Generative Artificial Intelligence tools (such as ChatGPT)
by students and learners.
The focus of this paper is on Generative Artificial Intelligence software that outputs text, but the
principles may be applied to other Generative Artificial Intelligence tools - for instance, those
that generate mathematical formulae, computer code images and other artifacts. For a brief
introduction to this software, readers are directed to our earlier paper.
This paper includes:
• Generative Artificial Intelligence as a
catalyst for enhancing assessment
strategy and practice

• creating a supportive environment
• a set of reflective questions
• table highlighting strengths and
weaknesses of different assessment types

• selecting modes of assessment
• managing academic integrity

• additional resources

Prompt for change
Awards are made, and classified, based on evidence that students have
met the learning outcomes for their programme of study and achieved,
or exceeded, certain threshold standards such as those articulated
in QAA’s Subject Benchmark Statements.The rapid rise and
ubiquity of Generative Artificial Intelligence software means
that some or all the assessments that currently contribute
to the evidence base may no longer be confidently ascribed
to an individual student. This problem is compounded by
the fact that the outputs of this software, despite its
limitations, cannot reliably be detected, as explained in
recent work by Weber-Wulff and colleagues. This is
something that will only become more challenging as
the tools become more sophisticated and embedded in
other software.
1

Generative Artificial Intelligence as a catalyst for enhancement
The rapid rise of Generative Artificial Intelligence software since OpenAI released ChatGPT
in November 2022 has presented a range of challenges for multiple sectors. For the tertiary
education sector, the focus has been on maintaining academic integrity, but it is also a powerful
catalyst for change. Specifically, it offers a generational incentive for providers to require their
programme and module teams to review and, where necessary, reimagine assessment strategies.

Reviewing assessment strategies
Three desirable outcomes of reviewing assessment strategies could be:
• Reducing the volume of assessment by removing items that are susceptible to misuse of
Generative Artificial Intelligence tools to generate unauthorised outputs and repurposing the
time available for other pedagogical activities.
• Promoting a shift towards greater use of synoptic assessments that test programme
level outcomes by requiring students to synthesise knowledge from different parts of
the programme. Some of these may permit or incorporate the use of Generative Artificial
Intelligence tools.
• Developing a range of authentic assessments in which students are asked to use and apply
their knowledge and competencies in real-life, often workplace related, settings. Ideally
authentic assessments should have a synoptic element.

Creating space for Artificial Intelligence literacy
Reducing the volume of assessment creates space in the curriculum that can be used to develop
a range of skills and competencies related to future employment, including how to use Generative
Artificial Intelligence software in a discipline-appropriate fashion. Developing critical artificial
intelligence literacy alongside other foundational academic skills, such as correct citation and
referencing and critical thinking, is important for two reasons. First, because we anticipate that if
it is not already a key graduate attribute, it very soon will be. Secondly, students will enter tertiary
education with considerable prior experience of these tools without necessarily having the
background to use them responsibly.

Aligning assessment and learning outcomes
In reviewing assessment strategies, programme teams need to ensure that assessment
methods and criteria remain aligned to learning outcomes and teaching activities. This and
other guiding principles for the update and (re)design of assessment strategies can be found
in the Assessment section of the UK Quality Code - Advice and Guidance. Mapping existing
assessments to programme-level outcomes and removing any redundancy may be helpful in
further reducing the assessment burden and identifying any gaps. Using an outcomes-based
approach, formative and summative assessment enables student engagement and scaffolds
learning to develop knowledge, competencies and skills. Further guidance on using an
outcomes-based approach to teaching, learning and assessment can be found in the QAA
Membership Resources site and in Assessment in Digital and Blended Pedagogy - the second of
the QAA Hallmarks of Success Playbooks.

Choosing a range of assessments to support students and fit the programme
The precise selection of assessment types that are used by programme teams to allow students
to evidence programme-level outcomes, while assuring academic integrity and meeting the
requirements of professional, statutory and regulatory bodies will remain course and discipline
specific. Some will choose to focus on forms of assessment that cannot currently be influenced
by Generative Artificial Intelligence software, while others will transition to assessments that
permit the use or actively incorporate generative tools in their completion. There is no single
solution and the choices that programme teams make will be significantly influenced by
institutional policies and the environment in which they are operating.
2

Selecting modes of assessment
The following range of assessment types is not intended to provide a comprehensive list of
options but rather it can be used as a prompt for the types of assessment that could be deployed
when developing programme-level assessment strategies.

Going backwards - unseen invigilated exams (handwritten)
One way in which the integrity of awards can be assured is to assess students exclusively or
substantially using timebound unseen in-person invigilated examinations that require candidates
to write their answers by hand. The strength of this traditional approach is that it allows the
sampling of a range of learning outcomes, but at the same time it represents a regressive solution
that would reverse much recent progress around accessibility. It is a form of assessment for which
many cohorts of students are increasingly ill prepared in their prior education and one that is not
authentic in that it tends to require a narrow range of competencies, such as the retention of
facts as well as handwriting significant amounts of text under time limitations that are simply not
relevant in many contemporary workplaces.

If you insist - unseen invigilated exams (digital)
There may be some, discipline-specific, scenarios in which time-bound examinations remain
necessary and appropriate. In this circumstance it may be better to deliver examinations via a
bespoke digitally secure platform. These allow unseen papers to be taken either in an invigilated
examination hall on computers equipped with lockdown browsers or remotely, perhaps with the
addition of digital proctoring software. It is a solution that, if required, allows online exams to
remain as part of an assessment diet, while allowing word processed answers and preventing the
use of Generative Artificial Intelligence software and other web-based resources. Further advice
on online invigilation and other considerations around online assessment, including equity and
student welfare, can be found in the QAA Membership publication Digital Assessment Security.

The best of both worlds - observed examinations
An alternative approach is to observe a student complete one or more specific tasks related
to their discipline or future employment and interview them about their understanding of the
related principles, context and applications. Assessments can be designed to be both authentic
and synoptic - for example, Observed Structured Clinical Examinations used in settings such as
medical and nurse education in which candidates progress around a series of stations at each of
which they are presented with a work-related task which they must complete and defend their
approach. Candidates are marked on each task by multiple examiners according to a strict and
objective rubric. This approach, which has been extended to the natural sciences using Observed
Structured Practical Examinations, allows the efficient synoptic assessment of large numbers of
candidates, although careful consideration needs to be given to scheduling to avoid unwanted
sharing of questions between candidates.

3

Talking heads - oral examinations
With appropriate safeguards, oral (viva-voce) examinations also offer an opportunity to assess
the breadth of a candidate’s knowledge and understanding, including confirmation that the
student was responsible for a written submission. Historically viva-voce examinations were
used in some disciplines to assess candidates on classification borderlines of undergraduate
degrees but have been discontinued at most providers on the grounds that they are unreliable
and unnecessarily stressful to students. However, oral examinations in the form of structured
interviews conducted by two or more examiners with clearly set out rubrics and appropriate
safeguards for vulnerable students may be used formatively or summatively as a synoptic
assessment. In addition, mini-vivas, in which small groups of students are interviewed together
about their written submissions, can serve both to authenticate the work and contribute to its
assessment. This approach, although resource intensive, is a powerful deterrent to students
considering contract cheating. However, there are accessibility and inclusion factors that
need to be considered with oral examinations - for example, recognising students with speech
impairments and to ensure students with different accents are treated equitably.

Coursework that integrates Generative Artificial Intelligence by design
To help prepare students for their future workplace, it may be useful to design authentic
coursework assessments which incorporate the use of Generative Artificial Intelligence software
to complete routine and/or repetitive tasks and ask the students to reflect on its usefulness.
Such an approach was the subject of a recent QAA Membership workshop - Using Generative
Artificial Intelligence for academic research - which explored how novice undergraduate
researchers can use a combination of ChatGPT and Google Scholar to complete a literature
search quickly and reliably. This exercise demonstrates that the ability to use Generative Artificial
Intelligence software ethically and effectively is an important competence for graduates to
demonstrate and also provides an excellent example of learning through doing, which is a key
tenant of competence-based education. Our recently published Competence-based Education
Primer expands on this approach and will provide further inspiration for the design of authentic
assessment.

Hybrid submissions and the future of academic writing
Developing discipline-relevant academic writing skills that allow learners to demonstrate their
ability to acquire and synthesise knowledge remains an important element of most, if not all,
degree programmes. Hybrid submissions of coursework that combine the output from Generative
Artificial Intelligence tools with the learner’s own work are already commonplace. In the
short-term, allowing hybrid submissions in which the contribution of Generative Artificial
Intelligence is fully acknowledged and is in keeping with institutional policies and guidelines,
is a useful transitional arrangement as providers plan for the near future in which Generative
Artificial Intelligence is embedded in the licensed software used by staff and students.
In planning for the future, it is vital to help learners progress from using Generative Artificial
Intelligence software to complete simple short-form writing exercises to submitting a capstone
dissertation, by providing ample formative opportunities to test their foundational academic skills,
practise writing, and receive timely and constructive feedback on their outputs. Taking a
long-term developmental approach avoids the immediate need to deploy unreliable detection
software, retains the usefulness of written assessments and nurtures academic writing skills.

4

At a glance - strengths and weaknesses of different assessment types
Assessment
type

Strengths

Weaknesses

Academic Sustainability
integrity

Invigilated
unseen
examinations
(handwritten)

Security - no (or only
controlled) access to
external physical or
digital sources

Accessibility - challenging
for students with certain
characteristics to access
plus rapidly decreasing
number of students
adequately prepared to
handwrite large amounts of
text

High

Low

Medium

Medium

High

High

Synoptic - tests
different learning
outcomes via structure
of paper and candidates’
choice of questions
Volume - can assess
large numbers of
students in parallel

Invigilated
unseen
examinations
(digital)

Resources - places
significant demands on a
provider’s estate

Distribution - exams
can be delivered offsite
with appropriate digital
security

Accessibility - there are
challenges, but these
may be easier to mitigate
through technology

Security - with correct
software, access to
external physical or
digital sources can be
limited by the provider

Authentic - depending on
assessment design, it may
only test a narrow range of
knowledge / competencies

Synoptic - tests
different learning
outcomes via structure
of paper and candidates’
choice of questions
Volume - can assess
large numbers of
students in parallel
Observed
examinations

Authentic - may only test a
narrow range of knowledge /
competencies

Authentic - opportunity
to apply competencies /
knowledge to a range of
realistic scenarios
Synoptic - tests a wide
range of competencies
and understanding from
different parts of the
programme

Security - even with
digital proctoring, remote
candidates can access
digital assessment via other
devices
Resources - need for
continual investment in
digital security software

Security - scheduling
demands may mean that
students assessed early
in cycle can transmit
information to those taking
the assessment later

Volume - can assess
significant numbers of
students in parallel

5

Oral
examinations

Authentic - tests
competencies that can
be used in interviews,
presentations and
meetings
Synoptic - tests a wide
range of competencies
and understanding from
different parts of the
programme

Coursework
that
integrates
Generative
Artificial
Intelligence by
design - use
of these tools
is part of the
assessment
brief and
outputs are
critiqued or
reflected upon

Authentic - learning by
doing, including using
Generative Artificial
Intelligence tools, can
be built into assessment
design
Detection - detection
is not necessary if using
the AI tools is part of the
assessment

Accessibility - stressful
for some students and
challenging for those with
certain characteristics
(eg speech or hearing
disabilities)

High

Low

High

High

Low

Medium

Resources - consumes
considerable amount of
staff time
Volume - suitable only for
individuals or small groups
at a time
Accessibility - need
to ensure fair access
to Generative Artificial
Intelligence tools for all
students
Resource - initial
investment of time and
ongoing review to take
account of developments in
AI tools.

Resource - can
repurpose existing
assessments
Synoptic - can be
designed to test a
range of knowledge
/ competencies and
different elements of a
module / programme

Hybrid
submissions
- in which
the use of
Generative
Artificial
Intelligence
tools are not
part of the
assessment
brief (eg essays,
dissertations)

Authentic - principally
for those students who
wish to continue to
postgraduate education
and beyond but also
other careers
Synoptic - tests the
ability to synthesise
knowledge and evidence
from across a programme

Accessibility - need
to ensure fair access
to Generative Artificial
Intelligence tools for all
students
Authentic - less obvious
relevance for those exiting
academia but still develops
evaluation of evidence and
synthesis
Detection - heavily
dependent on student
declaration even at current
state of evolution of tools
and will be even more
difficult when integrated in
licensed software
Resource - need to invest
more resource in developing
foundational academic skills
on which to scaffold ethical
use of Generative Artificial
Intelligence

6

Managing academic integrity
In transitioning to new or updated patterns of assessment, it is important that providers create
compassionate and supportive cultures in which students can serve as champions of academic
integrity for their peers. Students and staff will inevitably make missteps on this journey as they
adjust to a fast-changing environment and, in the first instance, academic misconduct policies
should be applied sensitively and sparingly. Institutional polices increasingly recognise that
submissions containing significant unauthorised content generation may not be regarded as
plagiarised using traditional definitions, but they do represent very poor academic practice
as they do not represent the student’s own work. In the first instance, suspected breaches of
academic integrity guidelines may be best dealt with through the appropriate student support
systems. However, in cases where an individual persistently exhibits poor academic practice
through the inappropriate use of Generative Artificial Intelligence tools, they may be referred to
their provider’s academic misconduct procedures. Where a student is suspected of misconduct
and has their case managed through academic misconduct processes, the level and extent of
the perceived offence, along with any previous offences, should be considered. Some guiding
principles can be found in the QAA Membership publication - Academic Misconduct Penalties Advice for providers.

Creating a supportive environment
The following conditions are likely to create a supportive environment for staff and students
that can facilitate the changes to learning, teaching and assessment required by the advent
of Generative Artificial Intelligence tools. These were shared in our previous advice and include
having in place:
• Up-to-date policies and guidance around academic misconduct that explain how and in
what circumstances Generative Artificial Intelligence tools may be used to prepare student
submissions. In framing guidance for staff and students around the legitimate use of these
tools, we encourage providers to reflect on the Academic Integrity Charter for UK Higher
Education and the seven Principles for Academic Integrity it sets out. The guidance should be
transparent, clearly communicated to all staff and students, and emphasise that academic
misconduct is unacceptable and that responsibility for the integrity of the submission lies with
the student.
• Opportunities for staff and students to learn and be updated regularly about other policies and
frameworks that intersect with local academic misconduct guidelines; these might include
policies around data protection and intellectual property.
• A digital literacy strategy - aims of which are clearly understood by staff and students - and
which might be usefully informed by Maha Bali’s definition of critical artificial intelligence
literacy, an ability to know how to use artificial intelligence tools, when it is appropriate to do
so and how to critique the credibility and accuracy of their output. Implementation of such a
strategy requires academic and professional staff to be familiar with institutional policies and
have opportunities to learn how artificial intelligence tools function and the ways in which
assessments can benefit from redesign to ensure the academic integrity of awards.
• Simple and fair arrangements for students to access the Generative Artificial Intelligence tools
they need to complete their submissions. These policies need to ensure, as far as possible,
that no advantage can be accrued by students who can access more advanced Generative
Artificial Intelligence tools from behind a paywall. The policies are likely to need regular
updating to take account of the future integration of tools into software packages that are
licensed by the provider for student use.

7

The importance of remaining vigilant and agile
The advice in this paper is current at the time of writing (July 2023) and can be adapted by
providers to suit their mission and student cohorts to support the review of existing assessment
practices. However, the technology is evolving rapidly and providers will need to review and update
their policies more frequently in response to the rate at which artificial intelligence software is
developing and launching new products. It is essential to tell students where they can find the
most up-to-date guidance. This can be supported by adding references to the location of current
institutional policies on Generative Artificial Intelligence tools and academic integrity to course
materials - such as module handbooks and assessment briefs.

Reflective questions for providers and programme teams
1. Have your educational strategies, student support mechanisms and academic misconduct
processes been reviewed, updated and appropriately resourced to help students navigate this
significant change in the way they learn, are taught and assessed?
2. How do the programme-level assessment approaches link to provider-level strategies? Is this
clear for students, especially those studying programmes across more than one department
(for example, joint degrees)?
3. Do your provider-level academic misconduct regulations include unauthorised, undeclared
or otherwise inappropriate use of Generative Artificial Intelligence tools and the consequent
outcomes? How do the provider-level regulations relate to programme-level guidance to
students? Is the language clear and accessible for students and all staff?
4. Has your review of the existing assessment pattern for the programme identified any
duplication, gaps or items that might be vulnerable to the use of Generative Artificial
Intelligence tools and, after revision, do the proposed assessment methods and criteria remain
aligned to learning outcomes and teaching activities?
5. Does your approach to assessment provide the best and most appropriate way for students
to demonstrate their learning and key competencies, including the use of Generative Artificial
Intelligence software, in a way that is sustainable, inclusive and assures academic integrity?
6. Do your arrangements for students submitting assessed work include a declaration of
authenticity that considers the responsible use of artificial intelligence tools?

8

Additional resources
From QAA:
• Our Chat GPT and Artificial Intelligence webpage hosts links to a range of QAA and external
resources relating to Generative Artificial Intelligence software.
• QAA Membership has supported two Collaborative Enhancement Projects relating to academic
integrity:
3⁄4 Accessibility and Equity in Proofreading led by Loughborough University
3⁄4 The improvement of student learning by linking inclusion / accessibility and academic
integrity led by Oxford Brookes University.
• Curated outputs from the QAA funded project Learning from the Online Pivot: Approaches to
aligning assessment and learning outcomes for student success which QAA commissioned
from Professor Elizabeth Cleaver and Professor Mike McLinden, independent higher education
consultants.
External resources:
• A contribution by Professor David Boud (Deakin University) Positioning assessment differently
in a world of gen AI to the webinar Artificial Intelligence and Pedagogy: Advancing Personalized
Learning, Adaptive Teaching, and Values-Based Assessment, recently hosted by the University
of Kent.
• The Russell Group has recently published its New principles on the use of AI in education.
• The most recent European Network for Academic Integrity (ENAI) Recommendations on
the ethical use of Artificial Intelligence in Education focus on the importance of equipping
stakeholders with the skills and knowledge to use Generative Artificial Intelligence tools
ethically and the need to develop and implement relevant educational policies addressing the
opportunities and challenges posed by artificial intelligence in education.
• The Programme Assessment Strategies (PASS) project hosted by the University of Bradford
offers further information about the design of an effective, efficient, inclusive and sustainable
assessment strategy which delivers the key programme outcomes.
• Programme design and delivery through the lens of academic integrity - a short webinar
hosted by Quality and Qualifications Ireland and presented by Kane Murdoch, Manager,
Conduct and Integrity Unit, University of New South Wales, which considers some issues
around programme design, delivery and assessment, and academic integrity.

Opportunities to discuss the use of Generative Artificial Intelligence
tools in tertiary education
Keep in touch with our events by checking our Generative Artificial Intelligence webpage and sign
up for weekly news with our QAA Member update.

QAA advice and guidance is funded through membership fees, and is an expression of the
sector’s shared commitment to protecting academic standards and enhancing quality.

Published - July 2023
© The Quality Assurance Agency for Higher Education 2023
Registered charity numbers 1062746 and SC037786
www.qaa.ac.uk

9
