ACADEMIC
REGULATIONS
2025-26

1

CONTENTS
Section

Title

Page
No

Section A

Modular Framework for Undergraduate and Taught Postgraduate
Programmes

3

Section B

General Regulations for Studying at St Mary’s University

11

Section C

Section C: Regulations for Undergraduate Programmes of Study

28

Section D

Regulations for Taught Postgraduate Programmes of Study

48

Section E

Regulations for the MPhil/PhD Pre-Registration Period

60

Section F

Regulations for the Postgraduate Certificate in Education (PGCE) (M)
and the Professional Certificate in Education (PFCE)

62

Section G

Assessment Regulations Organisation of Assessment

69

Section H

Assessment Criteria for School Experience

99

Section I

Regulations for Removal from Placements

101

Section J

Regulations for Appeal against Decisions of the University Examination
Board

103

Section K

Programme Administration

104

Section L

Regulations for External Examining

105

Appendix A

110

St Mary’s University Academic Regulations 2025-26 latest version 15.9.25

2

Section A: Modular Framework for
Undergraduate and Taught
Postgraduate Programmes
A1. Modularity
1.1 All of the University’s undergraduate and taught postgraduate programmes of
study are modular. In other words, they comprise a number of modules which, when
successfully completed by the student, lead to a Higher Education award or
qualification. Each module and programme is assigned to a Higher Education level
of study, in accordance with the Framework for Higher Education Qualifications in
Part A of the UK Quality Code. Please refer to Table 1, Awards, Levels and Credits
at St Mary’s University. Programme and module specifications are the governing
documents for individual programmes.

A2. Module Definition and Types of Module
2.1 Each module is a unit within which students will learn and be assessed on
subject content, knowledge and other intended outcomes. Students are assessed
against the published learning outcomes of each module. Modules also develop
transferable or key skills and, where appropriate, practical skills. All modules should
reflect the University’s policy on research-informed teaching and learning. Core
modules are compulsory and must be passed to enable progression, except where
the relevant regulations concerning compensation credits may apply. Option
modules may provide opportunities either within the main subject of the degree, or
for inter-disciplinary study within or beyond the Faculty, or for workplace learning.
Option modules for workplace learning may be offered at all three undergraduate
levels. Some programmes may also have ‘core option’ modules, where it is
compulsory for students to select from a group of designated modules. All other
credit requirements are made up by option modules chosen by students. This
structure provides a framework within which students can exercise an element of
choice over the direction of their studies, although in some programmes –
particularly those in professional disciplines – the curriculum may be more
prescriptive.

A3. Credits and Learning Hours

3

3.1 Each module is assigned a credit value according to the total number of hours of
student work (or “learning hours”) which it involves. Learning hours comprise contact
with academic staff, plus self-directed study. Each credit represents around 10 hours
of student work; thus a 20-credit module represents 200 learning hours. Within this
total, contact hours should be stated in module outlines, providing a clear breakdown
of how the contact is comprised. The amount of contact time (seminars, practicals,
lectures, etc) and self-directed study (research, planning, essay writing, seminar
preparation work, etc) will vary between subjects and levels. Successful completion
of a module earns the student the designated number of credits at the designated
level.

A4. Module Size
4.1 The module sizes which may be used in the University’s undergraduate and
taught postgraduate provision are as follows: For St Mary’s Online, the module size
differs as outlined in 4.2.
At all levels of study (FHEQ Level 3 to Level 7) modules are 20 credits. The only
exceptions to this are (a) the 40 credit Dissertation (Level 6) and (b) Independent
Study modules (Level 6 only), which may be at least 40 credits.
20 credit modules are normally delivered within a single semester. 40 credit
Dissertation and Independent Study modules are delivered across two consecutive
semesters.
Some Teaching Training Courses have specific modules worth 10 and 5 credits.
A minority of 20 credit modules may be designed for delivery across two consecutive
semesters (so-called “long thin modules”). However, validation panels will expect to
see such proposals supported by a sound pedagogic rationale. This should include
consideration of the appropriateness of long thin modules to the subject of study,
together with the assessment pattern and load for students, especially on Joint
Honours programmes.
Please refer to the relevant paragraphs in Section C: Regulations for Undergraduate
Programmes of Study.
Double modules of 40 credits may be offered where this is deemed appropriate. 30
credit modules may continue to be offered where there are compelling pedagogical,
student experience, quality enhancement or market sustainability reasons. Validation
4

panels will expect to see such proposals supported by a sound pedagogic rationale.
This should include consideration of the appropriateness of 30 or 40 credit modules
to the subject of study, together with the assessment pattern and load for students.
4.2 St Mary’s Online MBA and MSc programmes will adopt 15 credit modules as the
standard building block for online programmes. This differs to the standard Level 7
MA/MSc provision outlined above. Double modules of 30 credits may be offered
where deemed appropriate. Where programmes include a significant project or
dissertation component, modules of 45 and 60 credits may be permitted where
deemed appropriate.
Please refer to the relevant paragraphs in Section D: Regulations for Taught
Postgraduate Programmes of Study and Section E: Regulations for the Postgraduate
Certificate in Education (PGCE) (M) and the Professional Certificate in Education
(PfCE)

A5. Validated Awards Offered by St Mary’s University
5.1 Table 1 describes the validated programmes of study (sometimes called
‘awards’) offered by St Mary’s University. For each award listed, the following is also
provided: the relevant level of study in the Framework for HE Qualifications (FHEQ);
the credit requirements for the award; and the total learning hours for the award. The
FHEQ qualification level (column 2) indicates the academic standard of the award
and its constituent modules. (NB: Postgraduate research degree programmes at
Level 7 and 8 are awarded by St Mary's University. There may be some continuing
Postgraduate research degree students at Levels 7 and 8 who will be awarded by
the University of Surrey or Liverpool Hope University and, with the exception of the
Doctor of Education programme, are not typically credit-rated.)

Table 1 Awards, Levels and Credits at St Mary's University

5

AWARD

FHEQ
QUALIFICATION
LEVEL

CREDIT REQUIREMENTS

TYPICAL
LEARNING
HOURS

Certificate of Higher
Education (CertHE)

4

120 at Level 4

1,200

Table 1 Awards, Levels and Credits at St Mary's University
AWARD

FHEQ
QUALIFICATION
LEVEL

CREDIT REQUIREMENTS

TYPICAL
LEARNING
HOURS

Diploma of Higher
Education (DipHE)

5

240 including at least 120 at FHEQ
Level 5 or higher

2,400

Foundation degree (FD,
FdA, FdSc)

5

240 including at least 120 at FHEQ
Level 5

2,400

Ordinary Bachelor’s
degree (BA, BSc, BD,
BTh, LLB) *

6

300 including at least 60 at FHEQ

3,000

Level 6 and at least 120 at FHEQ
Level 5

NB Students progressing from
Foundation Degree programmes
require 60 Level 6 credits in order to
qualify for the award of Ordinary
Bachelor’s degree.

Bachelor’s degree with
Honours [BA (Hons),
BSc (Hons), BD (Hons),
BTh (Hons), LLB
(Hons)]

6

360 including at least 120 at FHEQ

3,600

Level 6 and not more than 120 at
FHEQ Level 5

NB Students progressing from
Foundation Degree programmes
require 120 Level 6 credits in order to
qualify for the award of Bachelor’s
degree with Honours.

6

Bachelor’s degree with
Honours with
Foundation Year [BA
(Hons), BSc (Hons)]

6

480 including at least 120 at FHEQ
Level 6

4,800

Graduate Certificate

6

60 at Level 6

600

Table 1 Awards, Levels and Credits at St Mary's University

7

AWARD

FHEQ
QUALIFICATION
LEVEL

CREDIT REQUIREMENTS

TYPICAL
LEARNING
HOURS

Graduate Diploma

6

120 at Level 6

1,200

Professional Graduate
Certificate in Education
(PFCE) Primary *

6

120 (of which up to 30 may be at
Level 7)

1, 480

Professional Graduate
Certificate in Education
(PFCE) Secondary *

6

120[of which up to 30 may be at Level
7)

1,480

Postgraduate
Certificate in Education
Primary [PGCE (M)]

7

120 (minimum 60 at Level 7)

1,480

Postgraduate
Certificate in Education
[PGCE (M)] Secondary

7

120(minimum 60 at Level 7)

1,480

Postgraduate
Certificate (PGCert)

7

60 at Level 7

600

Postgraduate diploma
(PGDip)

7

120 (minimum 90 at Level 7)

1,200

Master of Arts (MA)

7

180 (minimum 150 at Level 7, of
which 40 shall usually associated with
the Dissertation or equivalent major
project as specified in the Programme
Specification) **

1,800

Master of Laws [LLM
(“Latin Legum
Magister”)]

7

180 (minimum 150 at Level 7, of
which 40 shall usually be associated
with the Dissertation or equivalent
major project as specified in the
Programme Specification)

1,800

Master of Science
(MSc)

7

180 (minimum 150 at Level 7, of
which at least 40 shall be associated
with the Dissertation or equivalent
major project as specified in the
Programme Specification)**

1,800

Table 1 Awards, Levels and Credits at St Mary's University
AWARD

FHEQ
QUALIFICATION
LEVEL

CREDIT REQUIREMENTS

TYPICAL
LEARNING
HOURS

Master of research
(MRes)

7

180 (minimum 150 at Level 7, of
which 120 shall be associated with
the Supervised Research Project or
equivalent major project as specified
in the Programme Specification)

Master of Philosophy
(MPhil)

7

Not typically credit-rated

Not typically
stated

Doctor of Philosophy
(PhD)

8

Not typically credit-rated

Not typically
stated

Doctor of Education
(EdD)

Part 1 – Level 7,
Part 2 – Level 8

Part 1 - 180 credits, Part 2 - 360
credits

Part 1 -1800,
Part 2 - 3600

1,800

NB: Awards marked with an asterisk * are exit awards only. Awards marked ** are
not applicable to St Mary’s Online which does not include a dissertation or project
module as part of the award.
The credit requirements listed in the table should be read in conjunction with the
relevant paragraphs in Section C: Regulations for Undergraduate Programmes of
Study, Section D: Regulations for Taught Postgraduate Programmes of Study, and
Section F: Regulations for the Postgraduate Certificate in Education [PGCE (M)] &
the Professional Certificate in Education (PfCE).

A6 Joint and Dual Degrees
6.1 In collaborative provision, the University may also agree to offer Joint Degrees or
Dual Degrees:
Joint Degree: In this model, two (or more) degree-awarding institutions
collaborate in the design, approval and delivery of a programme, including the
creation of a single set of academic regulations specific to that programme. The
student may study in one or more of the institutions. The student receives one
award and one certificate, which carries the crests/logos of all participating
universities. The partner institutions must operate quality assurance and
8

enhancement processes which enable them to satisfy themselves that academic
standards are equivalent and meet the relevant national expectations.
Dual Degree: In this model, two (or more) degree-awarding institutions
collaborate in the design, approval and a delivery of a programme, and approval
of each partner’s academic regulations. The student may study in one or more of
the institutions. The student receives typically two awards and two certificates,
issued by the individual awarding institutions. The partner institutions must
operate quality assurance and enhancement processes which enable them to
satisfy themselves that academic standards are equivalent and meet the
relevant national expectations.
6.2 Due to the collaborative nature of joint and dual degrees, the procedures for
development and approval are determined on a case-by-case basis and agreed with
the collaborative partner(s). This includes but may not be limited to the following:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Partner approval
Alignment of the partners’ curriculum and academic processes to the FHEQ
Alignment of partners’ module and credit frameworks, with the 20 credit module
as the standard ‘building block’ at undergraduate and taught postgraduate levels
Programme development and validation
Agreement over joint procedures for the management of academic standards,
including:
Academic regulations, including those governing assessment
Monitoring and periodic review or revalidation
Externality

6.3 For further guidance on the development and approval of Joint and Dual
Degrees, please contact the Deputy Academic Registrar (Quality and Standards).
6.4 Intensive/Accelerated Degrees
St Mary’s University offers some accelerated degree programmes which allow
students to graduate with a bachelor’s degree within two academic years. Please
refer to the Programme Specifications and Programme Handbooks for more details
on these courses.

9

6.5 Placement Years
Students are expected to adhere to the rules around taking a placement year as set
out in the Placement Handbook. Please refer to the Employability and Placements
team for more information.

10

Section B: General Regulations for
Studying at St Mary’s University
B1. Admission
1.1 Students must apply to the University in the prescribed manner for a particular
programme of study and fulfil the admission requirements in accordance with the
Academic Regulations and Programme Specification.
1.2 Any appeals against Admissions decisions should be made in writing to the Head
of Admissions, in accordance with the Admissions Policy.

B2. Admission with Advanced Standing
2.1 Students who have undertaken study or learning elsewhere may apply for
exemption from a proportion of a University programme of study and be given entry
with advanced standing (e.g. at a point beyond the beginning of FHEQ Level 4) and
exemption from parts of their programme. The learning which may merit advanced
standing is as follows:
•
•

relevant credits, i.e. credits at an appropriate level and in an appropriate subject,
earned in another institution or in other institutions
relevant certificated prior learning.
2.2 The relevance, status and currency of the prior learning will be considered by the
Head of Admissions on the advice of the Course Lead.
2.3 The University will accept applications for accreditation of prior experiential or
uncertificated learning for entry to Masters or other professional programmes as
determined by the Course Lead on the advice of the Academic Registrar. The
University will accept applications for the accreditation of prior uncertificated learning
for particular modules as outlined in the regulations for programmes of study.

B3. Attendance
3.1 Students are expected to attend all the University classes and School
experiences, and to maintain an attendance level of at least 70%, or that dictated at
programme level (whichever is the highest). Students who do not meet the required
11

level of attendance may have their programme terminated. Students should refer to
the St Marys University Attendance and Engagement Policy
Attendance requirements for student visa holders are covered in the Student Visa
Engagement and Monitoring Policy.
3.2 For St Mary’s Online programmes, attendance monitoring will be replaced with
engagement monitoring. Expected levels of engagement will be measured based on
completion of specified tasks and activities, which will be dictated at a programme
level, in line with the policy on attendance.
It is therefore important for all students to recognise that failure to comply with the
attendance requirements associated with a programme of study could results in
student funding being withdrawn or a student’s right to remain in the UK being
curtailed.

B4. English Language Requirement
4.1 An applicant whose first language is not English or who has not been educated
wholly or mainly in the medium of English will be expected to reach, before
commencing the programme, a suitable minimum level of competence in the English
language. It is essential that a student is able to understand and to communicate in
both written and spoken English to a sufficient standard to follow the chosen
programme profitably. The University lists on its website the acceptable
qualifications/tests, which indicate a suitable minimum level of competence.
4.2 An applicant who does not meet the minimum standard through one of the above
qualifications or an equivalent will be required to undertake English language
instruction before admission.
4.3 The minimum English Language requirements of the UK Visas and Immigration
(UKVI) are the absolute minimum criteria for entry to the University, although a
higher level of English Language proficiency may be a requirement of a particular
subject/level of study and the relevant Programme Specification will provide clear
guidance as to the entry requirements in this regard.

12

4.4 Applicants to the programmes of MSc Physiotherapy (pre-registration) and MSc
Occupational Therapy (pre-registration) are required to have achieved an IELTS
score of at least 7.0 with no less than 6.5 scored in any one section.

B5. Ethics
5.1 Students are required to familiarise themselves with the ethical considerations
set out in the University Ethics Guidelines. Ethics are of particular importance when
undertaking any level of research or activity-based piece of academic work such as a
Dissertation or Project, and any queries about this should be referred to the
appropriate Module Convenor or Supervisor in the first instance.

B6. Allowed Modes of Study
Students may be full-time or part-time, or may with approval mix both modes of study
during their programmes. Subject to the agreement of the Academic Registrar, they
may also change modes at any time without adverse effect on the grade or creditvalue of any completed assessments.
It is important to note that changing from full-time to part-time and vice versa may
affect the level of fees and student loan entitlements, in line with Government
guidelines on funding.
6.1 Full-time Study
6.1.1 A full-time student is one who is undertaking a designated full-time programme
of study within the minimum time available and who registers for at least 100 credits
at Levels 4, 5 and 6 in any one academic year.
6.2 Part-time Study
6.2.1 A part-time student is registered on, and studies within the requirements of, an
award- bearing programme. They are permitted to study for up to 80 credits per year,
although this is normally 60 credits.
6.2.2 An Associate student is registered on one or more individual modules, but does
not contract for a complete programme of study leading to an Award of the
University. Associate students shall be eligible for credits on successful completion
13

of modules. Associate Students will no longer be admitted from 2024/25 except by
permission of the Academic Registrar
6.2.3 An Auditing (attendance-only) student registers for one or more individual
modules (at a reduced tuition fee) with no intent to undertake assessment or to
complete a programme of study leading to an Award of the University. Auditing
students therefore have no automatic entitlement to have written work marked, to
receive tutorial supervision, to take examinations, to access University learning
resources, or to gain an award. Such students shall not be eligible for credits on
completion of modules. Auditing Students will no longer be admitted from 2024/25
except by permission of the Academic Registrar.
6.3 Distance Learning, Work-Based Learning and Vocational Programmes
Some programmes are offered via distance learning, blended learning, day release
or other mode. The requirements for study of these programmes are outlined in the
Programme Specification.
6.4 Study Loads
The credit requirements for full-time and part-time study loads are outlined in the
relevant programme specification.

B7. Associate and Attendance-only Students Transferring to an
Award
7.1 Associate students may transfer registration to part-time or full-time student
status and an award-bearing programme. Modules already completed will be
credited towards their programme subject to the timescales for completing awards as
per Section C Regulation 4 (Credit Requirements) or Section D Regulation 4
(Duration of Study), and to the Programme Specification applying to the programme
of study concerned.
7.2 Auditing students may transfer registration to Associate student status, or to parttime or full- time student status and an award-bearing programme. They may claim
credit for Attendance-only modules as part of their programme only if they undertake
for assessment for and pass those modules and subject to the timescales for

14

completing awards Section C Regulation 4 or Section D Regulation 4, and to the
Programme Specification applying to the programme of study concerned.

B8. Annual University Registration
8.1 Upon registration (and subsequent re-registration), every student is deemed to
have declared their acceptance of the University Regulations, and all associated
University Policies and Procedures, for that academic year.
8.2 It is the responsibility of the individual student to notify the University of any
change to their personal contact details (such as home and term time addresses and
mobile telephone numbers) as they occur. The university will not be held responsible
for any missed communications if personal contact details are not current.
8.3 All full-time and part-time students entering the University at the commencement
of the academic year will be required to register for one academic year's programme
on initial registration, and thereafter to re-register annually at the beginning of each
new academic year until the completion of their programme of study.
8.4 It is the responsibility of the student to ensure that their registration is in
accordance with these Regulations and with any specific Programme Specifications
that apply, and to highlight any issues to Registry.
8.5 A student on a full-time programme of study of the University may not
simultaneously attend any other full-time programme of study of this or any other
University or Higher Education Institution.
8.6 Students must inform the University using the online student portal of any
intention to withdraw from any programme, whether permanently or temporarily, as
soon as is practicable. Student tuition fees will continue to be charged until a
withdrawal is made.
8.7 It will be deemed that the registration of students who fail to re-enrol at the
beginning of subsequent academic years has lapsed, and notification will be sent to
all relevant statutory bodies thereafter (including, but not necessarily limited to,
Student Finance England and the UKVI for student visa holders). Students must
generally (re)enrol within the designated window of registration as deemed by the
University.
15

B9. Registration for Awards
9.1 All full-time and part-time undergraduate students will be admitted to an
approved programme of study leading to an award.
9.2 Generally, all students will be registered for the final award designated by their
programme. On rare occasions when this is not the case, it will be specified to the
student.
9.3 Students who wish to undertake an intermediate award (e.g. a Certificate of
Higher Education, a Diploma of Higher Education for undergraduate students or in
the case of postgraduate students a Postgraduate Certificate or a Postgraduate
Diploma) should specify their intention at registration and the Academic Registrar will
consider whether this is permissible under the requirements of the programme and
within the Academic Regulations. Alternatively, students may claim such awards
retrospectively, provided they have completed the relevant award and programme
requirements and wish to withdraw from the registration for the Degree. There are no
intermediate awards for the PGCE.
9.4 Students who have taken an intermediate award and subsequently wish to return
to complete the final award will be allowed to continue at the discretion of the Course
Lead(s) and the Academic Registrar, and must complete the final award within the
timescales outlined in the relevant sections of these Regulations. When the final
award is made, the intermediate award will be rescinded and students must return
the certificate for the intermediate award before being given that for the final award.

B10. Length of Registration
10.1 The permitted length of registration is outlined in the appropriate programme of
study regulations within these Academic Regulations, (Section C Regulation 3 for
Undergraduate Programmes of Study; Section D Regulation 4 for Taught
Postgraduate Programmes of Study; and the Code of Practice for Research Degree
Programmes for Postgraduate Research Programmes of Study).
10.2 A student who has not qualified for an award in the period specified in
accordance with these Regulations and for whom no extension has been granted,
will be ineligible to continue and their programme shall normally be terminated by the
relevant University Examination Board. In these circumstances, the student is
16

entitled to the highest-level intermediate award available within the Programme,
provided the student has satisfied all of the requirements for that award.

B11. Module Registration
11.1 In addition to the annual University registration for an award, all students must
register for the appropriate modules to the required level of credit outlined above and
in accordance with the Programme Specification. It is the student's responsibility to
ensure that their module registration is correct. If there are any issues with incorrect
module registrations, these should be discussed with faculty administrators in the
first instance.
11.2 In order to be able to undertake a module, students must have fulfilled any
prerequisites specified in the Programme Specification.

11.3 No registration for a module will be allowed after the second week of teaching
of the module, except where specifically approved by the Academic Registrar on the
special recommendation of the relevant Course Lead.

11.4 For St Mary’s Online, the registration deadline for modules will be permitted up
until the week before the module commences. No registration will be permitted after
this deadline unless specifically approved by the Programme Lead and the Head of
Online Learning.

11.5 Students withdrawing from modules up until the end of the third week of
teaching will have the module removed from their student record.
11.6 After the third week of teaching, a student may withdraw from a module and this
may be retained on the record as a withdrawal provided they have not entered for
any assessment. After a student has entered for an assessment, any withdrawal
from a module will be recorded as failure in that module, unless supporting written
evidence of ill health or other Extenuating Circumstances for the withdrawal is
submitted in accordance with the Extenuating Circumstances Policy. Approval will be
the responsibility of the Academic Registrar on the advice of the relevant Course
Lead
11.7 Students enrolled on St Mary’s Online courses should refer to the SMU Online
Module Drop Policy and SMU Online Withdrawal Policy for specific guidance relating
to their modes of study.
17

B12. Payment of Tuition and Other Fees
12.1 Students must pay their tuition and other fees due to the University promptly.
12.2 Students who withdraw from the University will be liable for fees up until formal
notification of their withdrawal is received by the Registry, and in accordance with the
information on fees liability in the Tuition Fees Regulations.
12.3 Students who are in debt to the University will not be allowed to re-register for
the following academic year.
12.4 Students who are in debt to the University may have their programmes
terminated.
12.5 The termination will be undertaken by the Academic Registrar on the advice of
the Finance Department where a student has made no attempt to pay an
outstanding tuition fee debt. Such a termination may be rescinded on payment or a
satisfactory agreement to pay the debt.
12.6 No student shall be entitled to an award unless all fees for tuition due to the
University have been paid to the satisfaction of the University Finance Director, and
the rightful property of the University returned.
12.7 Students who have tuition fee debts outstanding will not be allowed to attend
University graduation ceremonies or receive an award certificate.

B13. Award of Credit
13.1 A successfully completed module earns a student the approved credits at the
designated level and in a defined subject.
13.2 Full-time, part-time and associate students, successfully completing one or
more modules shall be eligible for a University transcript listing the module(s) taken,
the credits gained and the marks for the module(s).
13.3 Following the end of each academic year, each student will receive an
electronic record of all modules taken (including fails and withdrawals), all marks
awarded, and where appropriate, any award conferred in that academic year.
18

13.4 Students may apply for a copy of their official transcript on payment of the
appropriate fee.

B14. Exchange Programmes
14.1 Students registered for an award at the University may apply to undertake credit
at another higher education institution as part of an exchange scheme approved by
the Academic Board.
14.2 The amount of credit and the modules to be undertaken will be approved by the
Course Lead prior to the student undertaking the exchange.
14.3 Specific marks or grades will not be transferred with the credit. Therefore any
credit secured under an exchange scheme will not be included in results used to
calculate the classification of an award, unless a method of translating marks from
the other institution has been agreed as part of the exchange scheme.#
14.4 Students who participate in a Study Abroad or Exchange programme are
responsible for understanding that credit is not transferable as outlined in the Study
Abroad handbook.

B15. Other Credit Transfer: Importing Credit from Other Institutions
15.1 A student registered for an award at the University may apply to undertake
modules at another higher education institution.
15.2 Such applications will be considered by the Academic Registrar on the advice
of the Course Lead who will consider the relevance of the credit to the student's
programme of study.
15.3 The amount of credit which may be imported will be subject to the maximum
amounts outlined in these Regulations.

B16. Progression
16.1 Students will remain on their programme providing they fulfil the requirements
for progression as set out in the programme of study requirements, or are otherwise
allowed to continue (for example, as a result of a University Examination Board
19

decision – see Section G12 to G31). This is also dependent on re-registration for
each academic year,

B17. Interruption
17.1 Where students are ineligible for progression and not permitted to continue their
programme of study, they will be classed as interrupted students and will be required
to retake the failed modules prior to progressing on their programme. This is
allowable for up to 40 credits.

B18. Programme Termination
18.1 A student’s programme may be terminated by the appropriate University
Examination Board where a student has:
1. Failed a core module, no compensation for the failure is allowed, and no further
resits or retakes are granted.
2. Has undertaken no assessment for a particular semester, or where there is
negligible achievement, or where all right of resit has been exhausted and
where no evidence of extenuating circumstances has been presented. The
termination will be undertaken on the basis of ‘No Academic Progress’ and can
be applied in either Semester 1 or Semester 2, or in line with the expected end
point for continuation or progression where programme dates vary from those
published in the main academic calendar.
3. Not completed a programme within the timescales permitted in the programme
of study regulations.
4. Committed an offence of Academic Misconduct where the procedure states
programme termination is the penalty.
5. Failure to adhere to the attendance and engagement requirements specified by
the programme or other regulatory bodies which may include Student Finance
England, The Student Loans Company and UKVI

Note also that a student registration may be terminated where tuition fees are owed,
(see Section B Regulation 12), or under the University’s Student Conduct Procedure.

B19. Appeals Against Decisions of the University Examinations
Boards or Termination of Programme
20

19.1 Students have the right of appeal against the decisions of the University
Examinations Board, such as termination of programme and these should be made
in accordance with the University’s Academic Appeals Procedure. The appeal should
only be made once the formal communication (usually by email) notifying the student
of the decision of Exam Board has been received.
19.2 Students who have had their programme terminated due to owing a tuition fee
debt must follow the guidance within the Tuition Fee Regulations.
19.3 Students whose programme has been terminated under the disciplinary
procedures have a right of appeal via the University’s Student Conduct Procedure.
19.4 Students whose programme has been terminated due to a failure to meet the
expected standards of attendance and engagement may appeal to the Academic
Registrar within 10 days of the termination letter being issued. The Academic
Registrar will request a full report of the circumstances surrounding the withdrawal
and notify students of any review of the termination within 15 working days. Students
who have appealed their withdrawal may continue on their course but they will be
unable to access funds from the SLC until the Academic Registrar has made a final
decision (see also B19.5).
Students who are studying under a student visa would not normally be eligible to
appeal withdrawal on the grounds of attendance or engagement due to Home Office
requirements on the attendance and engagement monitoring processes for these
cohorts.
19.5 Students who have made an appeal against a decision to terminate their
programme of study or withdrawal of University facilities will normally have the right
to remain on their programme of study until the appeal is decided. This does not
include students in debt to the University, or found to be in breach of the law with
reference to teaching or working with children or young people. In the latter situation,
students will be dealt with under the University’s Fitness to Practise Policy.

B20. Leave of Absence
20.1 A student may apply for Leave of Absence (i.e. interruption from their studies)
due to illness or other personal or extenuating circumstances. Leave of Absence
may be granted by the Academic Registrar in consultation with the Course Lead for
21

a period of up to one year, and may then be extended for a further year upon written
application to the Academic Registrar.
20.2 PGCE students must attend an interview with the Course Lead prior to an
extension to Leave of Absence being granted.
20.3 Periods of leave longer than two years may only be approved at the discretion
of the appropriate University Examination Board on the recommendation of the
Academic Registrar.
20.4 When on leave of absence, students may normally be able to defer any
assessments outstanding for modules that are incomplete until their return to the
University. Such application will be subject to the approval by the Academic
Registrar in consultation with the Course Lead, and subject to the availability of such
assessments.
20.5 Periods of Leave of Absence count towards a student’s registration period for
an award. Students should therefore bear in mind maximum periods of registration
for their award when entering into a Leave of Absence.

B21. Lapsed Students
21.1 It will be deemed that the registration of students who fail to re-enrol at the
beginning of subsequent academic years has lapsed.
21.2 Students whose programme registration has lapsed through failure to re-enrol
or through expiry of time, or where programmes have been terminated by the exam
board for the reasons outlined in Section 19 , will be made a lower award in cases
where they have accumulated sufficient credit for such an award. This is called an
Interim Award.
Students who have qualified with one of the awards listed below will be invited to
attend their Graduation Ceremony
•
•
•
•

22

BA/BSc Ordinary Degree
Postgraduate Certificate
Postgraduate Diploma
Apprenticeship Qualifications

21.3 Students who have accepted an undergraduate interim award will not usually
be expected to attend the annual awards ceremonies, but the Graduation team may
permit this as an exception. Students should submit their request to attend to the
Graduation team no later than 10 days before the designated ceremony and a final
decision will be notified within 5 working days.

21.4 Students who have been awarded an interim award as a result of the
termination of their studies due to a finding of by a Conduct or Academic Misconduct
panel will not automatically be invited to attend a graduation ceremony and should
apply to the Graduation Team if they wish to attend. Any final decision on attendance
will be made by the Graduation Team who will consider the nature of the misconduct
and make a judgement on the suitability of the candidate to attend. This decision
should be considered final.

B22. Withdrawal
22.1 A student who wishes to withdraw permanently from the University before the
normal completion of the programme shall give notice as soon as is practicable, via
the online student portal. Student loans will continue to accrue until this notice is
received.

B23. Re-admission after Withdrawal
23.1 A student who has withdrawn permanently may be re-admitted to the
University.
23.2 If a student is to be re-admitted to the same programme of study they must
complete the programme within the timescales set out in the appropriate programme
of study requirements from their original start date. Where exceptional circumstances
are presented, the Academic Registrar may agree an extension to the duration of
study.
23.3 Where a student wishes to re-apply to a different programme they will be
treated as a new entrant although they may apply for credit transfer under Section B
Regulation 2.
23.4 Where a student's programme was terminated due to failure to comply with
attendance requirements as outlined in the relevant attendance policy, failure to
submit assessment in line with the requirements of the programme specification or
as a result of academic failure, they may apply for re-admission to a different
programme of study through the normal admissions process. The Subject Lead
and/or the Course Lead may be asked to make the final decision on the suitability of
the candidate, based on the students’ existing qualifications and/or interview. This
23

decision is final, and the reasons for the original termination may be considered as
part of the decision to readmit or reject the student.
23.5 Accreditation of Prior Learning (APL) may apply to modules/credits previously
taken and passed at St Mary’s University or elsewhere at the discretion of the
Course Lead.
23.6 Applications would not normally be accepted any longer than three years after
the date of termination. This does not apply to PGCE programmes where re-entry
would normally not be permitted after one year.
23.7 As outlined in the Academic Regulations, Section G, 29.5, students who have
been terminated by the University Exam Board following a final finding of Academic
Misconduct are not eligible to transfer any credits to another programme of study at
the university or be accepted onto another course. Students may however apply for
a transcript which may allow them to transfer Accreditation of Prior Learning (APL) to
another HE institution.
23.8 Students who have had their studies terminated as a result of the University
Conduct procedure will not be eligible to transfer any credits to another programme
of study at the university or to be accepted onto another course.

B24. Additional Study Following Return to the University after
Periods of Leave or Interruption or Withdrawal
24.1 Academic Regulations and Programme Specifications are subject to revision on
a regular basis. Students who interrupt their period of continuous study, through
Leave of Absence or through Interruption, will on returning to the University be
expected to conform to the current Academic Regulations and Programme
Specification applying at the level to which the student returns. On the advice of the
Course Lead, additional study may be required in such cases to ensure that current
programme requirements are fulfilled. Students on Primary Education and PGCE
programmes will be required to undertake any additional periods of study to ensure
that they meet the required standards for Qualified Teacher Status in force on their
return.
In deciding whether a student can return to a programme after an extended period of
LOA or withdrawal, the Academic Registrar in consultation with the Course Lead and
Head of School will convene a panel to determine whether a return to study would be
appropriate. The decision of the panel is final and will be based on the previously
recorded levels of attainment, attendance, conduct and engagement with the
programme. (See also Section B, 23.7)
Any periods of leave of absence will be included in calculating the maximum duration
of study. Where a student is accepted back to a programme or joins a new
programme after period of withdrawal, the period of withdrawal will also be included
in the maximum duration of study.

24

B25. The Conferment of Awards
25.1 Degrees are determined and conferred by the appropriate University
Examination Board acting on delegated authority of the Academic Board.
25.2 The University will keep a permanent record of all awards made. The names of
those who have received awards of the University shall be published by the
Academic Registrar in the Graduation Ceremonies Booklet, subject to Data
Protection provisions.
25.3 Following the conferment of an award, an award certificate will either be
presented at a graduation ceremony or sent to the successful student through the
ordinary post to the student's home address as listed in the University records.
25.4 A replacement certificate can be issued by the University only on receipt of a
written request and on payment of the appropriate fee.
25.5 At the end of their programme students are entitled to a Diploma Supplement.
The Diploma shall record each module for which the student has registered, the
level, the credits gained (if any), the mark gained, and the award obtained.
Transcripts may be obtained at other times subject to the payment of the appropriate
fee.

B26. Awards Ceremony
26.1 Students will be invited to attend an awards ceremony for the presentation of
their award. Students who are made an exit award and those studying individual or
small groups of modules may not be eligible to attend.
26.2 Academic dress, as defined by the University, shall be worn for the
presentation.

B27 Procedural Irregularity
27.1 A "procedural irregularity" in the context of St Mary’s University Academic Regulations

refers to a situation where an administrative or procedural error has occurred during
the assessment process that significantly impacts a student's performance or
compromises the integrity of the assessment. This could involve errors in the way an
exam was conducted, a marking discrepancy, or a failure to follow established
procedures. Students who believe they have been affected by a procedural
irregularity can pursue an academic appeal or complaint.
25

Examples of ‘procedural irregularity’ can include the following
•

Clear evidence of inadequate assessment and/or marking, such as that a student's
work was not correctly assessed or graded. This should be distinct from a
disagreement over marks which have been properly awarded based on the markers
expertise and academic judgement and following the universities marking and
moderation procedures.

•

Inadequate assessment could also include a situation in where a student was not
given adequate time or resources to complete an assessment. n administrative error
in processing marks which impacts the outcome of an assessment.

•

A situation where a student was not given adequate time or resources to complete
an assessment.

•

Failure to follow the published rules and regulations during the assessment process.
Students who believe they have been affected by a procedural irregularity can
pursue an academic appeal or complaint.
The Academic Registrar will have the final authority on the outcome and resolution of
any cases of procedural irregularity

B29 Exceptional Arrangements – Unexpected Events
29.1 The University takes all reasonable steps to ensure that teaching and assessment

activity is not significantly disrupted and that the reliable confirmed grades for
student assessment are available to Boards of Examiners. However, in cases where
the normal daily academic business of the University is disrupted by unexpected
events such as natural disaster, pandemic, disease, acts of terrorism, fire or flood , it
may be necessary to respond to the circumstances by implementing Exceptional
Arrangement Regulations which can be invoked by the Provost and Chief Academic
Officer.
There may also be circumstances in which teaching and learning and assessment
activity cannot take place as scheduled. This could be due to industrial action or the
availability of physical and/or teaching resource. In such cases, the University will
endeavour to organise alternative arrangements for students to minimise the impact
to their scheduled learning, teaching and assessment.
Any regulatory changes which may impact the teaching, assessment and
progression and award of students will be communicated as soon as practicably
possible following emergency approval by Academic Board.

26

The Provost and Academic Registrar will be responsible for documenting and
implementing any changes and keeping staff and students informed.
Once the period of Exceptional Arrangements has passed, the Academic Board will
revoke the regulatory changes and the Academic Regulations in place at the time of
the unexpected event will resume.

Section C: Regulations for
Undergraduate Programmes of Study
C1. Undergraduate Awards offered by the University
1.1 Please refer to the relevant information in Section A, Table 1.

C2. Admission
2.1 The University has published its Admissions Policy on the website under the
‘How to Apply’ section of each programme level.

C3. Duration of Study
3.1 The overall duration of an undergraduate honours degree programme of study
from initial registration to completion shall be no less than three years of full-time
study, with the exception of Accelerated degree programme where the overall
duration from initial registration to completion shall be no less than two years of fulltime study.
3.2 The overall duration of an undergraduate Foundation degree programme of
study from initial registration to completion shall be no less than two years of full-time
study.
27

3.3 Foundation Degrees shall not exceed 5 consecutive semesters for FHEQ Level 4
and 5 consecutive semesters for FHEQ Level 5. This will be in line with the
regulations outlined in Section B, 24.
3.4 BA/BSc Degrees and three-year Primary Education degrees shall not exceed 4
consecutive semesters for FHEQ Level 4, 5 consecutive semesters for FHEQ Level
5, and 5 consecutive semesters for Year 3 (FHEQ Level 6).
3.5 For the Foundation degree, the overall duration of study shall not exceed 10
consecutive semesters.
3.6 For all Undergraduate Honours Degree Programmes, the overall duration of
study shall not exceed 14 consecutive semesters.
3.7 The regulations on Leave of Absence and Interruption outlined in Section B,
Regulation 24. Will apply to the maximum duration of study for all programmes.
Where students have been unable to complete their awards within the specified
timelines, the University Examination board may withdraw them from study as a
consequence of failing to meet the required academic standards within timelines.
This is deemed No Academic Progress (NAP)
3.8 Individual applications for remission of the Regulations concerning duration of
study may be approved by the Academic Registrar.

C4. Credit Requirements
4.1 Unless credit exemption is granted, all undergraduate students must complete at
least 120 credits worth of modules at each level. Completed modules may include
compensation credits subject to the specified limits outlined in Section C Regulation
17.

C5. Full-time Study
5.1 A full-time Foundation and BA/BSc undergraduate student will normally register
for 120 credits worth of modules in an academic year. Exceptionally, where a student
is trailing credit from previous levels, or by approval of the Academic Registrar on the
advice of the Course Lead, they may register for a maximum of 140 credits at Levels
4, 5 and 6 in any one academic year.
28

5.2 A full-time undergraduate student must register for no less than 40 credits and no
more than 100 credits per semester.

C6. Part-time Study
6.1 A part-time student must register for between 40 to 80 credits per academic year,
although 60 credits is typical. No part- time student may take more than 80 credits
worth of modules in any one academic year, excluding any modules that are resits,
unless this is permitted under the Programme Specification and/or with the approval
of the Academic Registrar.

C7. Distance Learning
7.1 Students on distance learning programmes are required to register for full or
part-time study. Any requirements for the programmes which differ from full-time or
part-time modes are outlined in the Programme Specification.

C8. Requirements for Foundation Degrees
8.1 The particular requirements for each Foundation Degree or other non-standard
programmes are set out in the Programme Specification for the programme.

C9. Requirements for BA/BSc Single Honours Programmes of Study
9.1 The particular requirements for each subject are set out in the Programme
Specification which may exceed the minimum credit required at each level as set out
below.
9.2 At FHEQ Level 4 (Year 1), single honours students must take at least 40 credits
in their subject, and 120 credits overall, providing all modules are approved and
listed in the programme specification the student is enrolled on. The list of available
option modules includes options in the student’s subject. It may be possible for
students to take 120 credits entirely in the subject.
9.3 At FHEQ Level 5 (Year 2), students on single honours programmes must take at
least 80 credits in modules in their chosen subject, and 120 credits overall, providing
29

all modules are approved and listed in the programme specification the student is
enrolled on.
9.4 At FHEQ Level 6 (Year 3) single honours students must take at least 100 credits
in their subject, and 120 credits overall, including either (a) a 40 credit Dissertation or
Independent Study module delivered over two consecutive semesters, or (b) a 20
credit Independent Study module plus an additional 20 credit option module from the
list of approved options listed in the programme specification the student is enrolled
on. In order to provide feedback and demonstrate that progress is being achieved in
the 40 credit Dissertation or Independent Study module, it is expected that work-inprogress is submitted at the end of Semester 1, and that this contributes to the final
module mark. Level 6 credits may also include approved credits associated with
workplace learning.

C10. Requirements for BA/BSc Joint Honours Programmes of Study
10.1 Joint, Major and Minor Honours degrees may only be achieved by meeting the
specific subject credit requirements across all levels, including any core
requirements listed in the programme specification the student is enrolled on.
10.2 To be eligible for the award of a joint, major, minor honours degree, a student
must have obtained the following minimum and maximum number of credits in each
area of study (i.e. Subject/ Programme A and Subject/Programme B) and for each
level of study (i.e. Level 4, 5 and 6).
Joint Honours/Equal combination (i.e. Subject A and Subject B)
•
•
•

Level 4: A minimum of 40 credits in both Subject A and Subject B
Level 5: A minimum of 60 credits in both Subject A and Subject B
Level 6: A minimum of 60 credits in both Subject A and Subject B
Joint Honours/ Major combination (i.e. Subject A with Subject B)

•
•
•

Level 4: A minimum of 40 credits in both Subject A and Subject B
Level 5: A minimum of 80 credits in Subject A + a minimum of 40 credits in Subject B
Level 6: A minimum of 80 credits in Subject A* + a minimum of 40 credits in Subject B
*To include Dissertation or Independent Study module
Joint Honours/ Minor combination (i.e. Subject B with Subject A)

•

Level 4: A minimum of 40 credits in both Subject A and Subject B
30

•
•

Level 5: A minimum of 40 credits in Subject A + a minimum of 80 credits in Subject B
Level 6: A minimum of 40 credits in Subject A + a minimum of 80 credits in Subject B*
*To include Dissertation or Independent Study module
10.3 At FHEQ Level 6 (Year 3) students on a 20/40 credit programme must take 120
credits overall plus the core requirements of any major or equals route as set out
below. This must include either (a) a 40 credit Dissertation or Independent Study in
either subject; or (b) a 40 credit Joint Dissertation or Joint Independent Study where
combinations allow this to be an option; or (c) a 20 credit Independent Study module
in either subject plus a 20 credit option module from the list of approved options
listed in the Programme Specification.
10.4 Students must take sufficient credit at FHEQ Level 5 (Year 2) and FHEQ Level
6 (Year 3) for the routes that they have chosen as follows:
1. Equals route: Joint Honours students who are aiming for an award in Subject
A and Subject B must take at least 60 credits in each subject at FHEQ Level 5
and at least 60 credits in each subject at FHEQ Level 6 including any core
requirements.
2. Major route: Joint Honours students aiming for an award in Subject
A with Subject B must take at least 80 credits in Subject A at FHEQ Level 5
and at least 80 credits at FHEQ Level 6.
3. Minor route: Joint Honours students aiming for an award in Subject
A with Subject B must take at least 40 credits in Subject B at FHEQ Level 5. A
further 40 credits must be taken in Subject B at either FHEQ Level 5 or FHEQ
Level 6 such that they have at least 60 credits in Subject B overall.
10.5 Providing students have fulfilled the core requirements and the overall credit
requirements for the programme of study they have chosen, students may take 40
credits at FHEQ Level 5 and FHEQ Level 6 in optional modules from either of their
subjects or take modules from other subjects, subject to any prerequisites provided
in the Programme Specification.

C11. Requirements for BA Primary Education Programmes of Study
11.1 Students on a BA Primary Education programme must take the programme as
prescribed in the Programme Specification.

31

11.2 In addition to their academic studies and periods of school experience, students
must also take the National Skills Tests or any other pre-requisite for the award of
Qualified Teacher Status that are current at the time of assessment.

C12. Requirements for BA/BSc Honours with Foundation Year (FHEQ
Level 3) Programme of Study
12.1 Students on a BA/BSc (Hons) Foundation Year programme must take the
programme as prescribed in the Programme Specification. All students that wish to
progress from Level 3 to Level 4, must pass 120 credits at Level 3. Progression
requirements for each route are set out in the relevant programme specification and
may vary between programmes.
12.2 Foundation level students are not permitted to repeat or retake failed Level 3
modules in a subsequent academic year. Trailing Level 3 modules into Level 4 is
also not permitted.
12.3 Students at Level 3 will be expected to pass all 120 credits within one academic
year. This will usually involve a third exceptional reassessment opportunity in order
to meet progression requirements
12.4 Where exceptional mitigating circumstances are evidenced, the Academic
Registrar may allow a student to repeat or resit modules where the student has the
support of the Programme lead and where a strong mark profile in other modules is
observed.
12.5 Students must attempt and pass 120 credits at Levels 3, 4, 5 & 6 to be eligible
for the award.12.4 Students at Foundation Year (Level 3) may be compensated in
line with the academic regulations for undergraduate degrees.

C13. Requirements for the Graduate Certificate and Graduate
Diploma
13.1 Students on a Graduate Certificate programme must take 60 credits at FHEQ
Level 6. Students on a Graduate Diploma programme must take 120 credits at
FHEQ Level 6. The particular requirements for each Graduate Certificate or Diploma
are set out in the Programme Specification.

C14. Independent Study Module
32

14.1 All students on undergraduate honours degrees must undertake an
independent study module of at least 20 credits in the final year of their programme.
The particular requirements for each programme are outlined in the Programme
Specification for the programme.

C15. Transfer between Undergraduate Programmes of Study
15.1 A student may request to transfer from one programme of study to another
normally at the start of their first academic year. Permission to transfer from one
programme to another is subject to the discretion of both Course Leads concerned
and the Academic Registrar. A student visa holder’s request to transfer from one
programme to another is subject to approval by the Academic Registrar, in
consultation with the UKVI Immigration and Compliance Manager.
15.2 Where a student's module registration will not be affected by a change in
programme of study (e.g. from single to joint honours during or at the end of FHEQ
Level 4, or from Major to Minor or vice versa) this transfer may be approved by the
Academic Registrar at any time, with the exception of a student visa holder.
15.3 Where a transfer in programme of study will mean a change to a student's
module registration, it may only take effect within the first two weeks of a semester,
except where specifically approved by the Academic Registrar on the special
recommendation of the relevant course lead. Such later changes may involve a year
of part-time study or the repeat of a year's study.
15.4 Any programme change agreed outside the first two weeks of a semester will
require a learning agreement to be drawn up by the new programme, which must be
signed by both the student and the new Course Lead.
15.5 Changes to a student's programme of study are approved by the Academic
Registrar or nominee, who will determine any additional study requirements, on the
advice of the Course Lead.
15.6 Where changes to programme of study involve periods of additional study, it is
the student's responsibility to ensure that the necessary funding is available.

C16. Transfer from BA Primary Education to a BA Degree

33

16.1 Students who no longer wish to pursue a Primary Education degree, or fail a
school experience on a second occasion, may transfer to an appropriate BA Primary
Education without QTS as a single honours degree, provided that they meet the
requirements.
16.2 Students in FHEQ Level 6 who are not eligible for BA Primary Education (with
or without QTS) may be awarded a BA in Primary Education on the satisfactory
completion of sufficient credit.

C17. Assessment Criteria for Undergraduate Awards
17.1 For undergraduate study the overall pass mark shall be 40% at FHEQ Levels 3,
4, 5 and 6.
17.2 Marks or other assessment outcomes will be allocated in accordance with the
University's generic grade related assessment criteria which are set out in the
University’s Assessment Policy. These criteria are typically contextualised by
individual programmes according to the nature of the assessment and subject to
approval at Validation/Revalidation.
17.3 The generic grade related assessment criteria will typically be augmented by
other criteria according to the requirements of the particular module and such criteria
must be clear and consistent.
17.4 Assessment according to the above criteria will be undertaken, governed by the
Assessment Regulations in Section G and the University’s Assessment Policy.
17.5 Grading criteria may also be influenced by the requirements of a Professional
Body (PSRB) on accredited programmes.

C18. The Assessment Criteria for School Experience Modules for BA
Primary Education.
18.1 Assessment according to the above criteria will be undertaken, governed by the
Assessment Regulations for School Experience in Section H.

C19. Progression

34

19.1 Students will automatically progress to the next level of study if they have
achieved 120 credits at the appropriate level, subject to re-enrolling in the
subsequent year.
19.2 For Single Honours students, satisfactory completion of the modules in their
chosen Subject will allow them to progress to the next level providing they have
acquired sufficient credit overall to progress, (namely a minimum of 100 credits for
20/40 credit programmes), and provided they have met any specified core
requirements and/or pre-requisites for their programme as outlined in the
Programme Specification.
19.3 For Joint Honours students, achieving sufficient credit overall will normally allow
them to progress, (namely a minimum of 100 credits for 20/40 credit
programmes), and provided they have met any specified core requirements and/or
pre-requisites for their programme as outlined in the Programme Specification.
19.4 Where a student has not completed satisfactorily all programme requirements,
the appropriate University Examinations Board shall have the discretion to allow
progression to the next level provided that no more than 20 credits are outstanding
from their overall credit requirements, and provided they have met any specified
core progression requirements for their programme.
19.5 BA Primary Education Students who fail a school experience may proceed to
the next level of academic studies, provided they have met any specified core
requirements and/or pre-requisites and have passed a minimum of a 100 credits for
20/40 credit programmes. The resit experience is taken at the next appropriate
opportunity. Students may resit one period of school experience only during their
programme of study, unless Extenuating Circumstances (in accordance with
the Extenuating Circumstances Policy) have been presented to and accepted by the
School Experience Review Board.

C20. Resit, Repeat and Interrupted Studies
20.1 Where students have not achieved enough credits to be eligible to progress to
the next level of study, they will be required to retake the failed modules in order to
progress. Where students are eligible for compensation, this will be applied before a
decision on progression is made by the Exam Board.

35

20.1 Where a student has no more than 40 credits of failure to retrieve, they have
the choice to be able to apply for a period of interruption in which to submit the
required reassessment. As an interrupted student they do not pay tuition fees or
attend lectures and seminars,but submit the outstanding work at the designated
deadlines across the academic year. In retaking a module students do not have the
right to any additional resits and previous attempts will still count towards the number
of attempts.
20.2 Where a student has failed 60 credits or more, they must retake the modules
they have failed and pay the required tuition fees either on a full or part-time basis.
They will have the right to attend lectures and seminars. Where students are retaking
a module they do not have the right to any additional resits and the marks gained at
previous attempts will still count towards the number of attempts.
20.3 Where Extenuating Circumstances have been accepted and a further
opportunity to sit a module has been agreed as a result of these, tuition fees will still
apply. The table below summarises the options for students who have failed to
achieve the full 120 credits required to be able to progress onto the next level of
study.
Credits Failed
Failed 20 credits
(not eligible for
compensation)
Failed 20 credits
(eligible for
compensation)
Failed 40 credits
(eligible for
compensation in
both modules)
Failed 40 credits
(eligible for
compensation in
one module)
Failed 40 credits
(not eligible for
compensation)
Failed 60 or more
credits

Next Steps
May progress and trail 20 credits

Compensation to be applied and progress

Compensation to be applied and progress

May be compensated in one module and
progress trailing the other module

Can apply for interrupted study (Resit
without attendance)
Repeat failed modules with attendance.

Tuition Fee Charged
Tuition fees will not
apply to the failed
module
Tuition fee will be
charged for next level
of study
Tuition fee will be
charged for next level
of study
May progress and trail
20 credits. Tuition
fees will not apply to
the failed module
Tuition fees will not be
charged
Tuition fees will apply
(even where there are
agreed ECs)

20.4 Where there are exceptional circumstances, the Academic Registrar may agree
alternative arrangements to those detailed above..

C21. Students who Fail to Complete the Requirement for their
Degree in the Minimum Timescales
36

21.1 Students in theory will be able to continue their studies on a full or part-time
basis until such a time as they have completed their award or are no longer within
the timescales in Section C Regulation 3. The regulations outlined in Section B,
Regulation 24 will also apply.

C22. Eligibility for Awards
22.1 Eligibility for awards depends on attainment of credits as follows, in accordance
with the Programme Specifications. 'Attained' credits shall include exempted credits
from other institutions or prior learning, credits given for modules passed,
compensation credits, School Experience or credits undertaken as part of an
approved exchange programme.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Certificate of Higher Education: 120 credits at FHEQ Level 4
Diploma of Higher Education: 240 credits, including at least 120 credits at FHEQ
Level 5 or higher
Foundation Degree: 240 credits, including at least 120 credits at FHEQ Level 5
BA/BSc Ordinary Degree: 300 credits including at least 60 credits at FHEQ Level 6
and at least 120 at FHEQ Level 5
BA/BSc 360 credits, including at least 120 credits at FHEQ Level 6 and not more
than 120 credits at FHEQ Level 5
BA/BSc Honours Degree (Foundation Year Programme): 480 Credits, including at
least 120 credits at each of FHEQ 3,4,5 and 6
Graduate Certificate: 60 credits at FHEQ Level 6
Graduate Diploma: 120 credits at FHEQ Level 6
22.2 In addition to the above, candidates for BA Primary Education degrees must
have passed the National Skills Tests before they will be recommended for an award
and also be recommended to the National Centre for Teaching and Leadership
(NCTL) for QTS. A Primary Education student who does not complete the prescribed
tests may be offered a BA (Honours) degree in Primary Education without QTS.

C23. Determination of BA or BSc Degrees
23.1 In cases where the majority of credits are from Arts Subjects, the degree of BA
will be awarded.
23.2 In cases where the majority of credits are from Science Subjects, the degree of
BSc will be awarded.
37

23.3 Students who complete their programme of study with an equal split of BA/BSc
credits will be awarded the appropriate award title (BA or BSc) based on their
independent study module choice. For example, a student completing their
programme of study with an equal split of BA/BSc credits who completes a sciencebased module as their independent study would be awarded a BSc by default. The
academic regulations specify that students on joint honours programmes take one
independent study module at level 6. In exceptional cases of a student being allowed
to take independent study modules at level 6 in both programmes, the module with
the highest mark will dictate the award should there be an equal split of BA/BSc
credits.

C24. Classification of Undergraduate Awards
24.1 The Certificate of Higher Education, the Diploma of Higher Education and the
BA/BSc Ordinary degree may be awarded with merit and distinction as follows:
•
•
•

Award with Distinction: 70%
Award with Merit: 60%
Award: 40%
For programmes running 20/40 credit modules the best 100 credits will be counted
for the Certificate and the best 200 credits will be counted for the Diploma of Higher
Education. The best 100 credits at FHEQ Level 5 and all credits at FHEQ Level 6 will
be counted for the Ordinary Degree.

C24.2 Classification of Foundation Degrees:
Foundation Degrees may be awarded with merit and distinction as follows:
•
•
•

Award with Distinction: 70%
Award with Merit: 60%
Award: 40%
24.2.1 The following single calculation method will apply across all 120 credits at
each level of study.
Overall Mark = 33/100 (FHEQ Level 4 Average Mark) + 67/100 (FHEQ Level 5
Average Mark)

C24.3 Classification of Undergraduate Degrees
38

The degrees of BA and BSc with Honours, will be normally classified according to
the following scale:
•
•
•
•

70% and above: First Class Honours
60% to 69%: Upper Second Class Honours
50% to 59%: Lower Second Class Honours
40% to 49%: Third Class Honours

24.3.1 The Graduate Certificate and Graduate Diploma will be awarded with merit
and distinction as follows:
•
•
•

Award with Distinction: 70%
Award with Merit: 60%
Award: 40%

In determining the overall mark for the Diploma for programmes running 20/40 credit
modules the best 100 credits will be counted.

C25. Determination of the Honours Degree Classification
25.1 For undergraduate students enrolled on an honours Bachelors (BA, BSc or
LLB) degree, the final mark is calculated by a single algorithm. This takes into
consideration marks at FHEQ Level 5 and FHEQ Level 6.
25.2 Modules for which assessment is by Pass/Fail only, e.g., School Experience,
will not contribute to the final mark by which the class of degree is determined.
25.3 The overall marks for an honours Bachelor's Degree shall be determined by
combining the mean of the marks at FHEQ Level 5 and FHEQ Level 6 subject to the
formula below:
For programmes running 20/40 credit modules, the average mark at each level shall
be a mark composed of the mean of a candidate's best 100 credits at FHEQ Level 5
and best 120 credits at FHEQ Level 6, including compensation credits.
When calculating the classification, the weighting of the average mark for each level
is as follows:
39

Weighting of the two counting years = 33% Level 5 & 67% Level 6
The module with the lowest mark at FHEQ Level 5 will be disregarded up to a
maximum of 20 credits.
25.4 The classification of awards to students who have been admitted with advanced
standing, or those who have transferred credit from another institution will be based
only on grades achieved in modules taken at the University, unless there is a specific
agreement otherwise in place.
Only grades that are confirmed by the St Mary’s University Programme board
against St Mary’s University delivered modules will be considered in any final
classification. Any APLs or credits carried forward from study outside the University
will be set at the passmark only.
25.5 Where admission with advanced standing has been approved with complete
exemption from the FHEQ Level 5 Programme, the overall grade will be calculated
based on all 120 credits at Level 6.
25.6 The classification of awards to students who have as part of their studies
undertaken credit at another institution will be based only on marks achieved in
modules taken at the University, unless there are specific arrangements in place,
any grades gained through a study abroad or exchange programme will not
contribute to the final classification and will be for credit only.
25.7 Where students have directly entered Level 6 on a top-up year, the prior credit
will count towards the Level 6 award even where it was awarded by another
institution.
25.8 The classification for top-up degrees undertaken following a Foundation Degree
is based solely on the aggregated average of all 120 credits at Level 6.
25.9 Where a student fails to pass all 120 credits at L6 of the top-up degree, an
Ordinary degree may be awarded as long as the student has successfully achieved
at least 100 credits at Level 6.
25.10 Students pursuing an award through an accelerated programme of study will
have their awards calculated in the following way
40

•
•
•

The 40-credit dissertation will be divided into 2 sets of 20 credits with the mark
being applied equally at both Level 5 and Level 6.
The lowest L5 module mark twill be disregarded. The Dissertation to be
included even if the module has the lowest mark at Level 5.
Award to be calculated in the same way as other Undergraduate awards and
calculated using 100 best credits at L5 and all 120 credits at L6.

25.11 Professional, Statutory and Regulatory Bodies’ (PSRB) accreditation
requirements may affect degree classifications and will supersede University
regulations.

C26. Determining Borderline Classifications
26.1 Undergraduate Degree Level Students
26.1.1 In determining the final degree classification for students whose overall mark
is close to the pass/fail borderline, an upgrade into the next classification band may
be applied where the students final overall mark is within 1% of a classification
boundary. No rounding will apply.

C27. Aegrotat Degree
27.1 In cases where a student has completed most of the requirements for an award,
but due to extenuating circumstances has been prevented by illness or other
incapacity from completing all of the assessment requirements for an individual
module(s), but more than 30 credits worth of modules remain to be completed, the
Board may recommend the award of an Aegrotat Degree.
27.2 A student who chooses not to accept the award of an Aegrotat Degree may
complete the assessment on a subsequent occasion. A student who is still unable to
complete the assessment on a subsequent occasion may then accept the award of
an Aegrotat Degree.

C28. Certification of Awards
28.3 All Certificates of Higher Education, Diplomas of Higher Education, Bachelor's
Degrees will be awarded in either one or two named Subjects in accordance with the
following wording:
•
•

Cert/Dip/BA/BSc in Subject A or:
Cert/Dip/BA/BSc in Subject A and Subject B or:
41

•

Cert/Dip/BA/BSc in Subject A with Subject B
28.4 Students on Single Honours programmes who are studying only one subject
and who have satisfied the examiners in accordance with Section C Regulation 8 will
be given the award, as appropriate:
CertHE/DipHE/BA/BSc in Subject A
28.5 For students on Joint Honours programmes, in order to receive certification 'IN
SUBJECT A AND SUBJECT B' it will be necessary to have satisfied the examiners
in accordance with Section C Regulation 10, but with the following minimum number
of credits in Subject A and in Subject B:
For 20/40 credit programme modules:

42

AWARD

SUBJECT A

SUBJECT B

Certificate of Higher
Education

40 (FHEQ Level 4)

40 (FHEQ
Level 4)

Diploma of Higher
Education

40 (FHEQ Level 5)

40 (FHEQ
Level 5)

BA/BSc Ordinary
Degree

80 (at FHEQ Level 5 & FHEQ Level 6) (of which at least 40
credits must be at FHEQ Level 6 in each subject)

80 (at FHEQ
Level 5 &
FHEQ Level
6)

BA/BSc Honours
Degree

80 (at FHEQ Level 5 & FHEQ Level 6) (of which at least 40
credits must be at FHEQ Level 6 in each subject)

80 (at FHEQ
Level 5 &
FHEQ Level
6)

28.6 For the purposes of certification the number of credits in each subject area shall
be denoted by the approved list of modules for the single honours. However, where
students have completed a Joint Honours programme and where a module is
accepted as part of both Subjects in their programme of study, the credits may be
counted for the purposes of the title of the award in either Subject.
For 20/40 credit programme modules:

AWARD

SUBJECT A

SUBJECT B

Diploma of Higher
Education

80 (FHEQ Level 5)

40 (FHEQ
Level 5)

BA/BSc Ordinary
Degree

100 (FHEQ Level 5 and 6) (of which at least 45 credits must be at
FHEQ Level 6 for Subject A)

40 (FHEQ
Level 5 and
6)

BA/BSc Honours
Degree

120 (at FHEQ Level 5 & FHEQ Level 6) (of which at least 90
credits must be at FHEQ Level 6 for Subject A)

60 (FHEQ
Levels 5
and 6)

For 20/40 credit programme modules:

43

AWARD

SUBJECT A

SUBJECT B

Diploma of Higher
Education

80 (FHEQ Level 5)

40 (FHEQ
Level 5)

BA/BSc Ordinary
Degree

100 (FHEQ Level 5 and 6) (of which at least 45 credits must be at
FHEQ Level 6 for Subject A)

40 (FHEQ
Level 5 and
6)

AWARD

SUBJECT A

SUBJECT B

BA/BSc Honours
Degree

120 (at FHEQ Level 5 & FHEQ Level 6) (of which at least 90
credits must be at FHEQ Level 6 for Subject A)

60 (FHEQ
Levels 5
and 6)

C29.1 Requirements of Professional, Statutory and Regulatory
Bodies pertaining to the St Mary’s BSc Physiotherapy award
29.1.1 A variation to the standard St Mary’s University Academic Regulations for the
BSc Physiotherapy programme was approved for the academic year 2022/23 in
order to meet the requirements of the Professional, Statutory and Regulatory Bodies
(PSRBs) who accredit the St Mary’s University BSc Physiotherapy programme.
29.1.2 Professional, Statutory and Regulatory Bodies accreditation requirements for
awarding degrees will supersede university Regulations (See Section C.25.4)

C29.2 Variation to the Undergraduate Regulations for the BSc
Physiotherapy award
29.2.1 Under the Academic Regulations for the BSc Physiotherapy award, students
following the BSc Physiotherapy programme having failed a particular module have
the right to resit a failed assessment (subject to any specific subject requirements)
on no more than one further occasion.
29.2.2 BSc Physiotherapy students who have failed a particular module and/or have
been recommended for a resit following a finding of academic misconduct have the
right to resit the assessment for the module (subject to any specific subject
requirements) on no more than one further occasion.
29.2.3 Students will be given an opportunity to retrieve a failed module in the next
appropriate reassessment period. This will usually be deferred to the reassessment
period as defined by the academic calendar for the current year of study. There may
be cases where is appropriate for alternative arrangements to be agreed by the
44

programme, such as where an outstanding resit attempt impacts the students’ ability
to join pre-arranged placements.
Students would not usually be given more than two attempts to pass a module in any
one academic year.
29.2.4 Any resit attempt will be capped at the pass mark of 40% as set out in the
Academic Regulations (see Section G.19) The capped mark will not be applied
where a student has approved extenuating circumstances (see Section G.24.1).
29.2.5 Any failed assessment must be retrieved within the current academic year.
Where students have submitted a successful claim for extenuating circumstances,
they may be permitted to attempt the deferred assessment in the next available
assessment period. Where the next available assessment period is not until the
following academic year, the University Examination Board may recommend an
exceptional resit within the current academic year. A student will not be allowed to
resit any more than 40 credits during any exceptional period of reassessment.
Where an Examination Board determines that there has been additional mitigation, it
may be agreed that a maximum of 40 credits of reassessment can be attempted.
29.2.6 Where a student has more than 40 credits worth of failure to retrieve, and has
approved extenuating circumstances material to that failure, the Examination Board
may recommend that they be given the opportunity to repeat the year. This will be
considered a repeat year with attendance and full yearly tuition fees will be charged.
29.2.7 Students on the BSc Physiotherapy programme will be unable to undertake a
repeat year other than where compelling extenuating circumstances have been
approved and this decision has been ratified by the University Examination Board.
29.2.8 Students who are unable to complete their degree within the standard
academic year (usually September to May) will be unable to attend summer
graduation and will be invited to attend the next scheduled ceremony.
29.2.9 It is mandatory to pass all the modules associated with this
programme. Students are required to achieve a pass mark of 40% in each
component of a module, and no form of credit compensation is permitted for this
programme due to PSRB requirements (see Section G.21 and G.22)
45

29.2.10 Where a student has passed all modules within the same academic year,
the Examination Board will recommend that they progress onto the next level of
study or confer an award.
29.2.11 Where a student has successfully retrieved failure during the summer
reassessment period, and has passed all other modules during the same academic
year, then the reassessment Examination Board will recommend that they are either
eligible for award or can progress onto the next level of study. (see Section C.19 and
C.21)
29.2.12 Where a student fails a module at the second and final attempt, the
University examination board will terminate their programme. (see Section G.16)
29.2.13 Where a student has not completed satisfactorily all programme
requirements, but has approved Extenuating Circumstances against a failed module,
the appropriate University Examinations Board shall have the discretion to allow
progression to the next level provided that no more than 20 credits are outstanding
from their overall credit requirements, and provided they have met any specified core
requirements for their programme. The trailed 20 credits will not incur any tuition fee.
29.2.14 Where a student has failed more than 20 credits in the academic year and
where they have approved extenuating circumstances, the examination board may
recommend that the student repeat the year of study in the following academic year.
This will be considered a repeat year with attendance and full yearly tuition fees will
be charged.

C29.3 Leave of absence for BSc Physiotherapy
29.3.1 Students on a BSc Physiotherapy programme are expected to remain in
continuous registration. Students who wish to take Leave of Absence (LOA) must
apply via the online student portal and provide compelling evidence of Extenuating
Circumstances. This will be considered by the Course Lead and the Academic
Registrar.
29.3.2 The right to a Leave of Absence on the BSc Physiotherapy programme is not
automatic and may be refused if it is deemed by the Course Lead and the Academic
Registrar that the PSRB requirements and learning outcomes of the programme will
be impacted by the student taking a LOA.
46

C29.5 Appeals Against Decisions of the University Examination
Boards or Termination of Programme
29.5.1 Students have the right of appeal against the decisions of the University
Examinations Board, such as termination of programme and these should be made
in accordance with the University’s Academic Appeals Procedure as set out in
Section B.19

Section D: Regulations for Taught
Postgraduate Programmes of Study
D1. Postgraduate Awards Offered by the University
1.1 Please refer to the relevant information in Section A, Table 1.

D2. Admission
2.1 Students may be admitted to the Degree of MA/MSc, Postgraduate Diploma or
Postgraduate Certificate with an appropriate first degree of a recognised institution.
2.2 Students who do not possess a first degree may be admitted provided that the
Course Lead is satisfied of the student's fitness to pursue the programme by virtue of
professional or other relevant qualifications and/or experience.
47

2.3 In addition to the above, students must also satisfy any particular programme
requirements.
2.4 Students whose first language is not English are required to satisfy the English
Language Requirements of the UKVI and the University, (Section B, Regulation 4).

D3. Admission with Advanced Standing
3.1 Students who have undertaken study or learning elsewhere may apply for
admission with advanced standing.
3.2 The maximum number of credits for which exemption may be given are as
follows:
•
•
•

Postgraduate Certificate up to 30 credits
Postgraduate Diploma up to 60 credits
Master's Degree up to 90 credits
3.3 Students who are given entry with advanced standing to a Masters programme
may be exempted from taught elements only.

D4. Duration of Study
4.1 The overall duration of study for a full-time Masters Programme from initial
registration to completion of programme requirements shall be one calendar year or
three semesters as prescribed by the programme (See 4.5 and 4.6 for exceptions).
4.2 A part-time Masters programme shall normally be followed over four or six
consecutive semesters as prescribed by the programme.
4.3 A part-time programme of study leading to a Postgraduate Certificate shall be of
no less than two consecutive semesters.
4.4 A part-time programme of study leading to a Postgraduate Diploma shall be of no
less than four consecutive semesters.

48

4.5 St Mary’s Online programmes do not follow a semester structure. Modules shall
run throughout the year, with fortnight breaks in August and December/January. A
part-time SMU Online programme shall normally be followed for a period of 24
months. A full-time programme shall be followed for a period of 12 months. The
maximum period of study permitted shall be 48 months.
4.6 The overall duration of study for the programme of full-time MSc Occupational
Therapy (pre-registration) is two years in total incorporating no less than 9= weeks of
taught or placement provision over two years.
4.7 Individual applications for remission of the Regulations concerning duration of
study may be approved by the appropriate University Examinations Board on the
recommendation of the Academic Registrar. Where students have been unable to
complete their awards within the specified timelines, the University Examination
board may withdraw them from study as a consequence of failing to meet the
required academic standards within timelines. This is deemed No Academic
Progress (NAP)

D5. Modes of Study and Credit Requirements
5.1 Full-time Study
5.1.1 A full-time Masters student must register for no fewer than 120 credits in an
academic year with a maximum of 180 credits overall.
5.1.2 A full-time student on a Postgraduate Diploma must register for 120 credits
over two consecutive semesters.
5.1.3 A full-time student on a Postgraduate Certificate must register for 60 credits in
one semester.
5.2 Part-time Study
5.2.1 No part-time student may take more than 80 credits in any one academic year,
excluding any modules that are re-sits, unless this is specifically permitted under the
Programme Specification.
5.3 Distance Learning

49

5.3.1 Students on distance learning programmes are required to register for full or
part-time study. Any requirements for the programmes which differ from full-time or
part-time modes are outlined in the Programme Specification.

D6. Pass Mark
6.1 The pass mark for modules at FHEQ Level 7 shall be 50%.
6.2 A mark of at least 50% overall shall be required for the award of a Postgraduate
Certificate, Postgraduate Diploma or Master's Degree.

D7. Assessment Criteria for Taught Modules and the Dissertation
7.1 For FHEQ Level 7 Modules the overall scheme used to assess work at
postgraduate level is set out in the University’s Assessment Policy.

D8. Continuation for Masters Students
8.1 Students on postgraduate programmes will be required to pass the modules for
which they have registered in one academic year to remain on the programme.
Where students have not achieved a pass they will be required to retrieve the failure
before proceeding, although the Postgraduate Examination Board may at its
discretion allow a student with no more than 30 credits in failed modules to proceed.
8.2 Students will normally be required to have achieved an overall pass mark of at
least 50% to be allowed to progress to the Masters Dissertation element of a
postgraduate programme.
8.3 Decisions regarding progression for students on postgraduate programmes shall
be taken by the Postgraduate Examination Board with a membership comprising:
•
•

The Chair of the University Postgraduate Examinations Board;
Two Postgraduate Course Leads.
8.4 All postgraduate students must have assessment results considered and
approved at the appropriate University Postgraduate Examination Boards
8.5 Where students have been unable to complete their awards within the specified
timelines, the University Examination board may withdraw them from study as failing
demonstrate the required academic progress. (No Academic Progress)
50

D9. Eligibility for Awards
9.1 Eligibility for awards depends on attainment of credits as follows, in accordance
with the Programme Specification. Attained credits shall include exempted credits
from other institutions or prior learning and credits given for modules passed.
•
•
•
•

Postgraduate Certificate: 60 credits at FHEQ Level 7
Postgraduate Diploma: 120 credits, including at least 90 credits at FHEQ Level 7
Master's Degree: 180 credits, including at least 150 credits at FHEQ Level 7, of
which 40 shall be associated with the submission of a Dissertation.
Note: Not all Masters programmes include a requirement for more heavily weighted
final report or dissertation. This will form part of the initial programme validation and
be reflected in the published programme specifications.

D10. Compensation Credits for Postgraduate Level students
10.1 At the discretion of the University Postgraduate Examination Board only, and
subject to any specific requirements set out in the Programme Specification, a
student who has failed a module but has shown strength in other areas may be
awarded compensation credits for the module provided:
i. the student has achieved a mark of not less than 40% in any substantive
element of assessment (worth 35% or more of the overall module mark) in the
module under consideration for compensatiion.
ii. the student has attempted all elements of the module. Where a student fails
a non-substantive element of assessment with a mark of 1-40% compensation may be applied.
iii. no more than one module or 30 credits may be compensated whichever is
the lesser;
iv. that students who are eligible for compensation, but who are still required to
undertake resits, are required to retake the module for which they achieved
the lowest mark.
10.2 Compensation credits will not be awarded for a module that forms a mandatory
part of a professional programme (as defined by the Programme Specification).

51

10.3 When compensation credits are awarded, the mark gained in the module will
stand and will be used for classification of the award where appropriate.
10.4 Compensation credits will not be awarded for the Dissertation or Project.
10.5 Where a student has a finding of Academic Misconduct or an Extenuating
circumstance claim relevant to the module, compensation credit will not normally be
applied.

D11. Classification of Postgraduate Awards
11.1 For students registering for their studies from 2024/25 the degrees of MA, MSc,
MBA or MRes will be awarded based on the overall average mark achieved across
all 180 credits at Level 7
Marks are aggregated across all 180 credits at Level 7. The overall average mark
will decide the final award.
Students may achieve an upgrade into a higher award band where the overall mark
is within 1% of the higher-grade boundary.
There is no rounding of the final grade, ie a mark of 68.5% would not be rounded to
69%
11.2 The Degrees of MA, MSc, MBA and MRes will be unclassified although they will
be awarded 'with Distinction' where a candidate has an overall percentage mark of
70%
11.3 The Degrees of MA, MSc, MBA and MRes will be awarded 'with Merit' where a
candidate has an overall percentage mark of 60%
11.4 The Postgraduate Diploma and Postgraduate Certificate will be unclassified,
although they may be awarded 'with Distinction' in cases where the average
percentage mark of a candidate's best 45 credits in the case of the certificate and 90
credits worth of modules in the case of the diploma is 70%. They may be awarded
‘with Merit’ in cases where the average percentage mark of a candidate's best 45
credits in the case of the certificate and 90 credits worth of modules in the case of
the diploma is 60%.
11.5 The Degrees of MA, MSc and MRes will be unclassified although they will be
awarded 'with Distinction' where a candidate has an overall percentage mark of 70%
from the best 150 credits and a mark of 70% or more in the dissertation module.

52

11.6 The Degrees of MA, MSc and MRes will be awarded 'with Merit' where a
candidate has an overall percentage mark of 60% from the best 150 taught credits
and a mark of 60% or more in the dissertation module.

D12. Borderlining at Masters Level
12.1 For students who enrolled prior to the academic year 2024/25 - in determining
the final degree award for students whose overall mark is close to the pass/fail
borderline or a Merit or Distinction threshold, the following convention will be applied
by the University Postgraduate Examinations Board:
•

that the Dissertation mark is in the higher class.

12.2 For Students enrolling in or subsequent to the academic year 2024/25 where an
overall mark l mark is close to the pass/fail borderline or Merit or Distinction
threshold the following convention will be applied by the University Postgraduate
Examination Board.
•

That the overall grade is within 1% of the higher-grade boundary. Rounding
will not be applied

D13. Certification of Awards
13.1 Postgraduate Certificates, Diplomas and Master's Degrees shall be awarded
with the certification in: Postgraduate Certificate/ Postgraduate Diploma/ MA/MSc in
(Programme Title).

D14. Requirements for Masters Dissertations
14.1 All students for the Degree of MA/MSc/MRes shall present a Dissertation on a
subject relevant to the programme, or undertake such equivalent major project
(subsequently referred to as the Dissertation) as may be specified in the Programme
Specification. The Regulations below set out the requirements for the Dissertation.
14.2 This excludes St Mary’s Online programmes, in which the award of MA or MSc
may be awarded for the completion of 180 taught credits completed without a
Dissertation or equivalent major project.

53

14.3 The university recognises that programme design may not always incorporate a
dissertation element as we work to provide an attractive and flexible curriculum
which reflects the changing needs of students and market forces

D15.1 Requirements of Professional, Statutory and Regulatory Bodies
pertaining to the St Mary’s MSc Occupational Therapy (preregistration) award
15.1.1 A variation to the standard St Mary’s University Academic Regulations for the
MSc Occupational Therapy (pre-registration) programme was approved for the
academic year 2024/25 in order to meet the requirements of the Professional,
Statutory and Regulatory Bodies (PSRBs) who accredit the St Mary’s University MSc
Occupational Therapy programme.
15.1.2 Professional, Statutory and Regulatory Bodies accreditation requirements for
awarding degrees will supersede university Regulations (See Section C.25.4)

D15.2 Variation to the postgraduate regulations for the award of MSc
Occupational Therapy (pre-registration)
15.2.1 Students following the MSc Occupational Therapy (pre-registration)
programme accredited by the Royal College of Occupational Therapists (RCOT) and
regulated by the Health and Care Professions Council (HCPC) are subject to the
following variations within the general academic regulations for postgraduate taught
provision.
15.2.2 Under Academic Regulations for the MSc Occupational Therapy award,
students following the MSc Occupational Therapy programme having failed a
particular module have the right to resit a failed assessment (subject to any specific
subject requirements) on no more than one further occasion.
15.2.3 MSc Occupational Therapy students having failed a particular module and/or
having been recommended for a resit following a finding of academic misconduct have
the right to resit the assessment for the module (subject to any specific subject
requirements) on no more than one further occasion.
15.2.4 Students will be given an opportunity to retrieve a failed module in the next
appropriate reassessment period. This will usually be deferred to the reassessment
period as defined by the academic calendar for the current year of study. There may
be cases where it is appropriate for alternative arrangements to be agreed by the
54

programme, such as where an outstanding resit attempt impacts the students’ ability
to join pre-arranged placements.
15.2.5 Students would not usually be given more than two attempts to pass a module
in any one academic year.
15.2.6 Any resit attempt will be capped at the pass mark of 50% as set out in the
Academic Regulations (see Section G.19) The capped mark will not be applied where
a student has approved extenuating circumstances (see Section G.24.1).
15.2.7 Any failed assessment must be retrieved within the current academic year.
Where students have submitted a successful claim for extenuating circumstances,
they may be permitted to attempt the deferred assessment in the next available
assessment period. Where the next available assessment period is not until the
following academic year the University Examination Board may permit an exceptional
resit within the current academic year where it is determined that there has been
additional mitigation.
15.2.8 A student is not permitted to resit any more than 40 credits in any period of
reassessment, exceptional or otherwise.
15.2.9 Where a student has more than 40 credits worth of failure to retrieve, and has
approved extenuating circumstances material to that failure, the Examination Board
may recommend that they be given the opportunity to repeat the year.
15.2.10 In exceptional circumstances, the University may establish an individual
scheme of study with any student who has not been able to complete, or has failed, a
mandatory assessment, but is eligible to undertake a further attempt and progress with
the pre-registration programme
15.2.11 Students will not be permitted a reassessment opportunity where they have
failed a practice-based learning component on substantiated grounds of fitness to
practise. Any completed hours of a failed practice-based learning component do not
count towards the overall minimum requirement of 1000 practice-based learning
hours.
15.2.12 Students will be withdrawn from a pre- registration programme if they fail their
second attempt at any practice-based learning component.
15.2.13 In extreme circumstances, where the University or the placement has received
information about, or allegations of, serious professional misconduct or other
55

behaviour which suggest that the clients or members of staff at a placement will be put
at risk if the placement is continued, the Programme Lead will remove the student with
immediate effect following consultation with the Provost.
15.2.14 Students on the MSc Occupational Therapy programme will be unable to
undertake a repeat year other than where extenuating circumstances have been
approved and the repeat opportunity has been confirmed by the University
Examination Board.
15.2.15 Students who are unable to complete their degree within the standard
academic year will be unable to attend a graduation ceremony until they have
satisfactorily completed the course and their award has been conferred by the
University Examination Board.
15.2.16

It

is mandatory to

pass all the

modules associated

with

this

programme. Students are required to achieve at minimum the pass mark of 50% in
each component of a module, and the St Mary’s University Internal Compensation and
Compensation rules do not apply (see Section D.10 and D.11)
15.2.17 Where a student has passed all modules within the same academic year, the
University Examination Board will recommend that they confer an award.
15.2.18 Where a student has successfully retrieved failure, and has passed all other
modules during the same academic year, the reassessment University Examination
Board will recommend that they are either eligible for award or can continue with their
studies. (see Section C.21)
15.2.19 Where a student fails a module at the second and final attempt, the University
Examination Board will terminate their programme. (see Section G.16)
15.2.20 Where a student has not satisfactorily completed all programme requirements,
but has approved Extenuating Circumstances against a failed module, the University
Examination Board shall have the discretion to allow an extension to the overall
duration of study to allow the student to complete their qualification. Any resits will not
incur a tuition fee.

D15.2 Leave of absence for MSc Occupational Therapy
15.2.1 Students on a MSc Occupational Therapy programme are expected to remain
in continuous registration. Students who wish to take Leave of Absence (LOA) must
56

apply via the online student portal and provide compelling evidence of Extenuating
Circumstances. This will be considered by the Course Lead and the Academic
Registrar.
15.2.2 The right to a Leave of Absence on the MSc Occupational Therapy programme
is not automatic and may be refused if it is deemed by the Course Lead and the
Academic Registrar that the PSRB requirements and learning outcomes of the
programme will be impacted by the student taking a LOA.

D16 Appeals Against Decisions of the University Examinations Boards
or Termination of Programme
16.1 Students have the right of appeal against the decisions of the University
Examination Board, such as termination of programme and these should be made in
accordance with the University’s Academic Appeals Procedure as set out in Section
B.19
These variations to Academic Regulations for the MSc Occupational Therapy (preregistration programme) were first published in September 2025.

D17. Using the Work of Others and Collaborative Projects
17.1 A student shall indicate by means of explicit references the citation of the work
of others or work by the student which is not part of the submission for the Degree.
Work submitted for another Degree may not comprise part of the submission for the
Degree of MA/MSc/MRes.
17.2 When two or more students have conducted a joint or group project, each
student shall normally submit a separate Dissertation in accordance with Programme
Specifications. Each student shall be required to satisfy the examiners that the
student's share of the work is sufficient to justify the award of the Degree by means
of an introductory note, and in the case of a Joint Dissertation shall be required to
specify the contributions made by the student to the Dissertation. A copy of such a
note should be countersigned by the co-workers.

D18. Submission of the Dissertation

57

18.1 The Dissertation, or other work in place thereof, shall be submitted within the
time limit specified in Section D Regulation 4.
18.2 All pages of the Dissertation should be numbered. The title page shall bear the
title, approved in accordance with the Programme requirements, the student's name,
the Degree for which the student is registered and the year in which the Dissertation
is presented. A summary of the work, not exceeding three hundred words in length
must follow the title page.
18.3 The Dissertation shall be written in English except when permission is given, in
accordance with the Programme requirements, for another language to be used
owing to the nature of the subject. The summary must always be written in English.
18.4 One copy of the Dissertation must be submitted to the University. A student is
advised to keep an additional copy for personal use.
18.5 No alterations or additions may be made to a Dissertation after it has been
submitted.
18.6 Dissertations in fulfilment of MRes, or those from MA/MSc programmes
awarded 'with distinction' may be included in the University Repository. For inclusion
in the Repository an electronic copy should be submitted to the Repository via
the Research Archive pages. Electronic submission to the Repository is the
responsibility of the Course Lead.

D19. Copyright and Access to Dissertation
19.1 Copies of Dissertations accepted for the Degree of MRes, and those for
MA/MSc which are awarded “with distinction” may be placed in the University
Repository and are available for anyone to consult. A student is therefore advised to
mark their Dissertation as copyright. It shall, however, be a condition of acceptance
of a Dissertation that the Library be empowered to reproduce the Dissertation in hard
copy format or otherwise disseminate electronically to those institutions or persons
who, in the Library staff’s opinion, require them for academic purposes.
19.2 If the sponsoring organisation or collaborating body considers that the
Dissertation contains matter of a confidential nature, the author may instruct the
Library staff to restrict access to a Dissertation for a period not exceeding five years.
58

Access to the Dissertation may be allowed during this period only with permission of
person(s) specified by the sponsoring organisation or collaborating body. Similarly, if
it is desired to seek a patent from matter in the Dissertation, the author may instruct
the LRC staff to restrict access for a period not exceeding one year. If it is desired to
extend the restriction beyond the above periods, or restrict access on other grounds,
application must be made by writing to the Academic Registrar.

19.3 While the copyright of the Dissertation belongs to the author, a student is
required to assign to the University or its nominee intellectual property rights
(whether patentable or otherwise) that the student is considered to have acquired
whilst studying at the University in return for a fair proportion of any net receipts in
accordance with the terms of the Intellectual Property Code. A student may,
however, be subject to a specific agreement with the student's sponsor concerning
the assignment of intellectual property rights to the sponsor

Section E: Regulations for the
MPhil/PhD Pre-Registration Period
1. Prior to registering for an MPhil/PhD with the University, candidates may be
required to register with St Mary’s University for a period of six months in order to
develop their research proposal and their application to the University.
2. In order to be admitted to the Pre-Registration Period, applicants must meet the
entry requirements of the University for an MPhil/PhD and have a viable research
topic.
3. Applicants will be interviewed by the proposed Director of Studies and another
member of the School in which they wish to study.
4. Following a successful interview, candidates must apply to the University on the
appropriate form. Applications for the Pre-Registration Period will be approved by the
Sub-Committee for Research Students.
5. Once accepted onto the Pre-Registration Period, students will register with the
University on either a full or part-time basis and pay the appropriate fee.

59

6. During the Pre-Registration Period, students will work with their proposed Director
of Studies to develop their research proposal and their application to the University.
7. The completed application will be submitted to the Sub-Committee for Research
Students’ Progress which must approve it prior to its submission to the University for
consideration.
8. Following approval by the University, students will register for their research
degree and the University Regulations for Research Degrees will apply from this
point.
9. The candidature with the University will commence from the date of the approval
of the application by Liverpool Hope University. The Pre-Registration Period will not
count towards candidature for the MPhil/PhD.
10. Candidates must complete their research proposal and application within six
months. No extensions will be given to the Pre-Registration Period. Where a
candidate does not complete within the above timeframe they will not be able to
continue with their application.
11. If a candidate chooses to withdraw prior to the end of the Pre-Registration Period
there will be no refund of fees paid. Students must inform the Academic Registrar in
writing of their intention to withdraw.
12. Candidates whose application for an MPhil/PhD is not accepted by the SubCommittee for Research Students following the Pre-Registration Period will be
provided with a full written explanation. Such candidates have the right of appeal to
the University and should notify the Academic Registrar in writing of their intention to
appeal.
13. Prospective students from outside the EU/EEA may not be eligible for the
MPhil/PhD Pre-Registration Period due to the requirements of the UKVI. The
Academic Registrar will be able to advise further upon receipt of a written request by
the prospective student.

60

Section F: Regulations for the
Postgraduate Certificate in Education
(PGCE) (M) and the Professional
Certificate in Education (PFCE)
F1. Awards Offered by the University
1.1 Please refer to the relevant information in Section A, Table 1.
1.2 The PGCE and the PfCE with QTS lead to Qualified Teacher Status (QTS) which
is awarded by the DfE upon recommendation of the University following successful
completion of one of the above programmes. For those students who commenced
their programme of study prior to April 2020, they must also hold pass marks in each
of the National Skills Tests. Additionally, all students must satisfy any other
requirements which may be set down by government regulation from time to time.
Qualified teacher status (QTS) - GOV.UK (www.gov.uk)
1.3 The PGCE (non-QTS) does not lead to Qualified Teacher Status.

F2. Modes of Study
2.1 The PGCE/ PfCE with QTS Primary is available in full-time and part-time modes
of study.
2.2 The PGCE/ PfCE with QTS Secondary is normally only available in full-time
mode of study.
2.3 The PGCE (non-QTS) is available as a full time and part time mode of study.

F3. Duration of Study
3.1 Full-time Study: A full-time PGCE/ PfCE student is one who is undertaking a
programme of study over one academic year.
3.2 Part-time Study: A part-time PGCE/ PfCE student is one who is undertaking a
programme of study over two academic years.

61

3.3 Subject to the agreement of the Subject Lead, students on the full-time Primary
programme may change from the full-time to the part-time mode of study, (but not
from the part-time to the full-time mode) without adverse effect on the grades of any
completed assessments.

F4. Admission
4.1 Students may be admitted to a Postgraduate QTS programme where they have
satisfied the Subject Lead that:
1. They have the capability to meet the current required standards set down by
Government regulation by the end of their training and that they possess
appropriate personal and intellectual qualities to be teachers;
2. They have achieved a standard equivalent to a grade C or level 4 in the GCSE
examination in English and Mathematics;
3. For Primary programmes, where they are born on or after 01 September 1979
have achieved a standard equivalent to a grade C or level 4 in the GCSE
examination in a Science subject;
4. They have met the requirements for physical and mental fitness to teach
defined by the Department for Education
5. They comply with the pre-enrolment checks outlined in the ITT Safeguarding
Policy, including but not limited to not appearing on the Children's Barred
List/List 99 or the prohibition order checklist and have met the 2018 Childcare
Disqualification requirements;
6. They are effective readers, able to communicate clearly and accurately in
spoken and written Standard English;
7. IELTS score of 6.5 overall with no less than 6.0 in any section (where
appropriate)
8. They hold an appropriate degree of a United Kingdom Higher Education
Institution (HEI), or its equivalent.
4.2 The selection procedure will be by means of an assessment of the educational
qualifications, personal qualities and skills and an interview.
4.3 In addition, candidates will have to undertake a health check and a criminal
record check by the Disclosure and Barring Service. (DBS)

62

4.4 Students who are found to have made false or incomplete declarations as part of
the admissions procedure will be dealt with under the University’s Disciplinary
Procedures.
4.5 Programme specific requirements for admissions onto the PGCE (non-QTS)
programme include:
1. Working towards Qualified Teacher Status (QTS) or equivalent international
teaching qualification;
2. A minimum of a second-class Bachelor’s Honours degree from a UK university
or an overseas qualification of equivalent standard;
3. Practising teacher in an Ofsted-registered secondary school;
4. Satisfactory reference from current Head of employing-school;

F5. Admission from Other Higher Education Institutes, Graduate
Teacher Route and Flexible Routes
5.1 Students who have commenced their training at another HEI, or Teacher
Training provider may be admitted providing the Course Lead is satisfied that there
are sound reasons for making the change.
5.2 Students in this category must also satisfy the University that they meet the
above entry requirements.
5.3 Where transferring students have completed assessments at another HEI, these
may be credited at the discretion of the Course Lead, subject to a maximum of 60
credits. Such students must take their final school experience with the University.
5.4 Additionally, Schools Direct students and those on flexible routes into teaching,
may "buy-in" to aspects of the programmes offered at agreed rates.

F6. Registration
6.1 Full-time PGCE /PfCE with QTS students, entering the University at the
commencement of the academic year, are required to register for one academic
year's programme.
6.2 Part-time PGCE /PfCE with QTS students, entering the University part-way
through the academic year are requested to register on admission for a complete
63

programme to the end of the academic year and to register for a second time upon
recommencement of their programme.
6.3 Full time PGCE (non-QTS) students, entering the University at the
commencement of the academic year, are required to register for a period of one
academic year.

F7. Leave of Absence
7.1 Students on a PGCE/ PfCE with QTS and PGCE (non-QTS) programme are
expected to remain in continuous registration. Students who wish to take Leave of
Absence (LOA) must apply via the online student portal and provide acceptable
evidence of Extenuating Circumstances.
7.2 Leave of one year will be granted in the first instance. Students will be
responsible for undertaking any work on account of changes to the Programme
made necessary by changes to the standards set down by government regulation.

F8. Attendance
8.1 Students are expected to attend all the University classes and School
experiences, and to maintain an attendance level dictated in the University’s
Attendance Policy. Students who do not meet the required level of attendance,
and/or who are absent for 20 days or more in total without providing acceptable
reasons to the Course Lead, may have their programme terminated.
8.2 Students who have Extenuating Circumstances for their absence should present
these in advance of the period of absence, wherever possible to the Course Lead
and in accordance with the Extenuating Circumstances Policy. Such students maybe
be required to take Leave of Absence where they will not be able to meet the
standards before the normal end of the programme.

F9. University-Based Assessment
9.1 University based assessments for the PGCE /PfCE with QTS, and PGCE (nonQTS) Programmes will be undertaken according to the University Academic
Regulations.

64

9.2 Students must submit all formal assessments on the dates and times published
in the Programme Guidelines. Procedures for submission must be followed as set
down in the Programme Guidelines.
9.3 Students failing to submit on the published dates will be allocated a fail grade
unless extenuating circumstances have been acknowledged in writing by the Course
Lead or nominee and permission for a late submission granted (see 10 below).
9.4 Students must pass all assessments. Where a module has two or more
assessments a student must pass each assessment component in order to pass the
module. No compensation is allowed either between elements of modules or
between modules.
9.5 A student who has failed more than two assessed pieces of work may be
required to retrieve their failure before they may proceed with their programme. This
may entail additional periods of study.
9.6 The University commits to avoiding the setting of deadlines or exams on key
dates of religious observance where practicable to do so. The dates are published in
our Academic Calendar which can be found here
https://www.stmarys.ac.uk/about/term-dates.aspx

F10. Late Submission of Coursework
10.1 Students who are unable to meet a submission deadline owing to Extenuating
Circumstances, may apply to the Course Lead for permission for a late submission.
Such applications can only be made if they are in accordance with the Guidelines
for Extenuating Circumstances Policy.

F11. Pass Mark
11.1 The pass mark for each assessment for the PGCE with QTS is 40%, or 50% in
the case of the Masters elements (FHEQ Level 7) of the PGCE
11.2 The pass mark for each assessment for the PGCE (non-QTS) is 50% for the
Masters elements (FHEQ Level 7).

65

F12. Failure of University-based Assessment
12.1 Where an assessment receives a fail mark of below 40%, or 50% in the case of
the FHEQ Level 7 element of the PGCE with QTS and PGCE (non-QTS), students
may be permitted to re-submit the assessment within three weeks of notification of
the failed submission.
12.2 A student has a right to resit one piece of failed level 6 or 7 work. Further resits
may be determined by the appropriate PGCE Programme Examination Board
providing the student has passed their school experience and has an improving
profile see section 18 of the Academic Regulations).
12.3 Where a student holds a fail mark at the end of the programme, the appropriate
PGCE Examination Board will decide whether the student should be offered a period
of retrieval in order to be re-considered for the PGCE/PfCE with QTS, and PGCE
(non-QTS).
12.4 The standard Related Criteria for Assessment of University-Based Assessment
are detailed in the University’s Assessment Policy.

F13. Assessment of School Experience
13.1 Profile of Standards: The Assessment Profile of Standards addresses the
assessment of students’ school experience against the current Teachers’ Standards
for qualified teacher status (QTS) set down by the DfE. Students are required to
have updated the Profiles with their mentors at each assessment point to capture
their progress on each of Standards.
13.2 Assessment Criteria for School Experience will be assessed according to the
Regulations set out in Section H.

F14. Eligibility for the PGCE (M) / PGCE with QTS
14.1 To be eligible for the PGCE /PfCE with QTS a student must have satisfactorily
completed all University-based assessment as set out in the programme
specification and completed the required school experience as set down in the DFE
Criteria for ITT.

66

F15. Award Requirements
15.1 To be eligible for the award of PGCE Secondary with QTS students must gain
120 credits of which 60 are at FHEQ Level 7.
15.1a To be eligible for the award of PGCE Secondary with QTS (SEND
Enhancement) students must gain 140 credits of which 60 are at FHEQ Level 7.
15.2 To be eligible for the award of PGCE Primary with QTS students must gain 120
credits of which 60 are at FHEQ Level 7.
15.3 To be eligible to the award of PfCE Secondary with QTS students must gain
120 credits of which up to 30 may be at FHEQ Level 7.
15.4 To be eligible to the award of PfCE Primary with QTS students must gain 120
credits of which up to 30 may be at FHEQ Level 7.
15.5 To be eligible for the award of QTS students must gain 60 credits at FHEQ
Level 6 and all assessed school experiences.

F16. Classification of PGCE Awards
16.1 The PGCE / PfCE with QTS, and PGCE (non-QTS) will be unclassified.

F17. Certification of PGCE Awards
17.1 All PGCE/PfCE with QTS certificates will state the age phase. The subject
specialism will also be stated where appropriate.
17.2 PGCE (non-QTS) will not state an age phase and will not denote a specialist
subject.

67

Section G: Assessment Regulations
Organisation of Assessment
G1. Determining Module Assessment
1.1 All students taking a module in order to gain University credits will be assessed
by the same methods.
1.2 Assessment should be addressed as an integral part of module/programme
design and approved at the point of validation or, in the case of individual modules,
by Academic Board.
1.3 There must be a clear relation between assessment tasks and learning
outcomes. Programmes should have a variety of assessment strategies to match the
diversity of modules within a programme. In particular, assessment criteria should
reflect the range of learning outcomes of a module or programme; assessment tasks
should be stimulating, demanding and appropriate to both the learning outcomes and
the level.
1.4 Learning outcomes and assessment criteria for each element of assessment
should be clearly stated in Module/ outlines or handbooks.
1.5 Programme Specifications shall make explicit any specific attendance
requirements. Where there are Subject-specific attendance requirements which
exceed the minimum University, requirements set out in Section B Regulation 3, the
Programme Specification will specify the minimum or particular attendance
requirements and any penalties attached to inadequate attendance.

G2. Approval of Assessments
68

2.1 Each Programme Examination Board shall approve the process for setting the
assessment for all modules within its jurisdiction.
2.2 The Programme Examination Board will approve the subject of coursework and
examination papers. This function may be delegated but must involve the External
Examiner.

G3. Scheduling of Assessment
3.1 Course leads should coordinate assessment to avoid, so far as it is possible, an
excessive or unbalanced workload for students and for staff. Programmes should
inform students of the assessment at the earliest opportunity, normally the beginning
of the module.

G4. Regulations for the Conduct of Formal Examinations
4.1 Approval of General Arrangements
4.1.1 The general arrangements for the conduct of examinations held at St Mary’s
University towards an award of the University shall be held in accordance with these
Regulations.
4.2 Responsibility
4.2.1 The administration of written formal, timed examinations shall be the
responsibility of the Academic Registrar.
4.2.2 It is the responsibility of the Course Lead in conjunction with the Examinations
Officer to ensure that all examination papers are with Registry by the due date
notified to them by the Academic Registrar
4.3 Publication of the Examination Timetable
4.3.1 A schedule of formal, timed examinations, which shall show the date and time
of each examination and the place where it is to be held, shall be published by
Registry at least four weeks before the date of any examination shown in the
schedule. For practical reasons, resit examinations are not subject to the four week

69

rule. Notwithstanding, the University reserves the right to amend such details in
advance of the examinations if necessary.
4.4 Venue for Examinations
4.4.1 Examinations may be held in any room designated for that purpose by
Registry.
4.4.2 Students may be permitted to enter the exam venue up to 30 minutes late.
However, the end time of the exam will remain the same and additional time will not
be allocated for latecomers. Where a student can provide evidence to explain their
lateness, ECS may be agreed and the Fit to Sit policy may be waived.
4.4.3 Students are prohibited from bringing any printed material, dictionaries,
electronic devices or calculators into an exam unless this is a requirement of the
assessment and pre-approval has been gained from the Exams Office
4.5 Special Arrangements for Students with a Disability or Additional
Requirements
4.5.1 Special arrangements for the examination may be made for a candidate with
additional requirements that shall warrant such arrangements. In order that suitable
arrangements can be made, any candidate with an additional requirement should
apply for consideration in the first semester to the Dyslexia & Disability Co-ordinator,
or as soon as the additional requirements are known. There will be a published
deadline each semester for students wishing to be assessed for additional
requirements.
4.5.2 The Academic Registrar is responsible for ensuring that the additional
requirements of candidates are provided for.
4.6 Copyright
4.6.1 The law relating to copyright shall be observed in the preparation of
examination papers and associated materials.
4.7 Invigilation Arrangements
4.7.1 Any formal, timed examination held in an examination room shall be subject to
invigilation. There shall always be at least two invigilators appointed to each main
examination room. Where the number of examination candidates in any examination

70

room exceeds 100, there shall be appointed at least one invigilator for every 50
students or part thereof.
4.7.2 For candidates with special examination arrangements there shall be at least
one invigilator.
4.7.3 Invigilators shall normally be appointed by the Course Lead in consultation with
the Examinations Officer. All members of the Academic Staff of the University shall
be eligible for appointment and required to act as invigilators.
4.8 Chief Invigilator
4.8.1 There shall be a Chief Invigilator appointed to each examination room who
shall be responsible for the overall conduct of the examinations in that room and
shall ensure that proper provision has been made for the conduct of the
examinations before their commencement. The appointee shall normally be a
member of the Academic Staff of the University.
4.8.2 All invigilators will be required to undertake their duties under the direction of
the Chief Invigilator.
4.9 Instructions to Examination Candidates
4.9.1 Invigilators shall ensure that the Instructions to Examination Candidates are
observed. Any deficiencies in the general arrangements for the examinations, and/or
in the observance of the Instructions to Examination Candidates, shall be brought to
the attention of the Chief Invigilator and thereafter to the Academic Registrar.
4.10 Retention and Return of Examination Scripts, Dissertations and
Coursework
4.10.1 The Office for Students requires Higher Education Institutions to retain
assessed work for a period of at least five years after a student has completed their
degree course. See the OfS Supplementary Guidance: Retention of Assessed Work
for further clarification on the requirements around this.
4.10.2 A copy of a Dissertation submitted for assessment as part of a Master’s
Degree by examination may be retained in the University Repository.

71

4.10.3 Written work and other material presented for assessment, other than

G5. Student Feedback
5.1 Staff will provide students with timely and regular feedback on their performance
and progress; students should be informed what they can expect in terms of
feedback in relation to particular types of assessment and whether or not it is to be
accompanied by a return of assessed work.
5.2 Feedback on coursework will be given by means of a structured feedback sheet
that addresses the assessment criteria. Such feedback will relate to the published
learning outcomes and include appropriate guidance on how the work may be
improved.
5.3 Students may request feedback on examination performance from the module
convenor on an individual basis.

G6 Determination of Marks
6.1 Staff Responsibility for Marking
6.1.1 Only Academic staff who are members of the Programme Examination Board
will be responsible for the marks awarded to students. Where postgraduate students,
part-time visiting lecturers, demonstrators and teaching assistants are employed,
established and experienced members of staff shall systematically scrutinise and
oversee any assessment carried out by these members of staff.

G7. Marking and Moderation
7.1 Anonymous Marking
7.1.1 With the notable exception of written work relating to the assessments of work
placement activity, to avoid bias (either inadvertent or deliberate), anonymous
marking is to be undertaken for all written assessment to ensure that the identity of
students is not disclosed to markers.
7.1.2 Blind/anonymous marking for written work relating to the assessment of work
placement will not normally be possible due to the naming of placement locations
identifying the student by default. In order to avoid bias (either inadvertent or
deliberate) in the assessment of this type of written work, Second Marking and
72

Moderation practises should be carried out in accordance with the University
Assessment Policy. Marking is usually expected to be completed within 15 working
days..
7.2 Second Marking
7.2.1 Written assessments at FHEQ Levels 4 and 5 of Foundation Degrees and
FHEQ Level 7 will be moderated by a second marker. This will be undertaken on a
sample basis to be determined by the Programme Examination Board in accordance
with University Assessment Policy. A minimum sample of 10% will be chosen, which
includes an even spread from the top, middle and bottom of the marking scale.
Moderation is expected to be completed in 5 working days
7.2.2 All Dissertations or Projects must be double marked. A record of both marks
must be maintained and where the marks differ, a rationale must be provided
explaining how the final mark was arrived at. 7.2.3 At FHEQ Level 4 all assessments
at the pass/fail borderline (with an overall module grade of 39%) should be double
marked.
7.2.4 Markers should provide sufficient comments with the script for the External
Examiner to understand the reasons for the mark given.
7.3 Moderation
7.3.1 Moderation requires that a representative sample of students work will normally
be reviewed by an External Examiner in order to ensure consistent application of the
assessment criteria. Around 10% of work should be reviewed by the External
Examiner.
7.3.2 All borderline fails, including those at FHEQ Level 4, must be moderated.
Further information regarding guidance and definitions is provided in the University
Assessment Policy.

G8. External Examining
8.1 For each Subject there will be one or more External Examiners.

73

8.2 External Examiners shall be appointed by the Academic Board, after scrutiny and
recommendation by the University’s Quality and Standards Team.
8.3 The role and duties of External Examiners are outlined in the University
Regulations for External Examining Section L.

G9. Meetings, Decisions and Recommendations of the Programme
Examination Board
9.1 Programme Examination Boards
9.1.1 Each Subject or discrete Programme shall establish a Programme Examination
Board that shall be responsible for the assessment of all modules within the Subject
or Programme. It is the Programme Boards of Examiner's responsibility to ensure
that appropriate judgements are rendered on students' achievement.
9.1.2 The approval of marks for individual assessments and overall module marks
will be the responsibility of the Programme Examination Board.
9.2 Membership and Quorum of Programme Examination Board
9.2.1 The Programme Examination Board will comprise:
Chair: Where possible, the Chair should be a Course Lead from a different School to
that in which the Subject/Programme is located but it is recognised that this may not
always be possible.
Members: Course Leads
Module Convenors of all contributory Modules External Examiner(s)
9.2.2 Visiting Lecturers who have responsibility for modules shall be members of the
Programme Examination Board.
9.2.3 Chairs of Programme Examination Boards shall be appointed by the Head of
School within which the Programme is located and shall usually serve for a
maximum of two periods of three years.
9.2.4 Each Subject or Programme shall appoint an Examinations Co-ordinator who,
as a minimum, will be responsible for the organisation of the meeting in conjunction
74

with the Course Lead, for recording all recommendations made and for liaison and
communication of marks to the Examinations Office. Other duties may be required of
the Examinations Officer.
9.2.5 In cases where a module appears in more than one subject, the Course Lead
for the Subject which includes the module but whose Board is not responsible for it
shall be entitled to attend all relevant meetings of the sponsoring Programme
Examination Board. Conversely, in cases where a module appears in more than one
subject programme, the Module Convenor shall be entitled to attend all relevant
meetings of the Programme Examination Board on the non-sponsoring Programme
Board.
9.2.6 The quorum for a Programme Examination Board is 50% of eligible members.
9.2.7 The attendance in person of at least one External Examiner is required where
marks are ratified. Attendance is not required at the Resit Examination Board. In
exceptional circumstances permission may be sought from the Chair of the
appropriate University Examinations Board to hold a meeting in the absence of
External Examiners if, for example, an External Examiner is taken ill on the day of
the board meeting and it is absolutely impossible to rearrange a meeting before the
deadline for marks to be handed to the Registry.
9.2.8 All proceedings of examination boards shall remain confidential to the
members of the Board with the exception of information from Programme
Examination Boards which may be shared with the appropriate University
Examination Board.
9.2.9 All meetings of Programme Examination Board should be fully Minuted by a
member of administrative staff. The Minutes should be signed by the Chair and the
External Examiner of the Programme Board and a copy supplied to Registry prior to
the relevant University Examination Board.
9.2.10 At its meetings, each Programme Examination Board will determine the
marks of all assessment of its sponsored modules. The decisions will comprise:
•
•

a percentage mark for each assessment that the student has taken
an overall percentage mark for each student for each module taken

75

9.2.11 The Programme Examination Board will make recommendations to the
appropriate University Examination Board for the following situations:
•
•

in respect of compulsory programme requirements, recommendations for termination
where students have no right of resit or retake
where students who have as a group been disadvantaged through errors or some
other circumstance beyond their control under Section G Regulation 27.
9.2.12 Every effort should be made to reach a decision by consensus. If it proves
necessary to vote on any matter it shall be determined by a simple majority; each
member present shall have one vote and in the case of no majority being reached
the Chair shall have an additional casting vote.
9.2.13 The views of the External Examiner(s) should carry particular weight in cases
of dispute and External Examiners have the right to refuse to sign a mark sheet if
they believe that a Board has made a wrong decision. If an External Examiner
refuses to sign a mark sheet this shall be reported as soon as possible to the Chair
of the appropriate University's Examination Board.

G10. University Examination Boards
10.1 Decisions on awards; compensation credits for Undergraduate and Masters’
students; and programme termination shall be the responsibility of the University
Undergraduate Examinations Board for Foundation and Undergraduate
programmes; the University Postgraduate Examinations Board for Postgraduate
programmes; and the University PGCE Examination Board as appropriate. These
Examination Boards may sometimes be combined for reasons of operational
efficiency.
10.2 The Board will also receive recommendations on programme progression;
Extenuating Circumstances and academic misconduct panels.
10.3 The membership of the University Undergraduate (including Foundation)
Examinations Board shall be as follows:

76

•
•
•
•

Chair and Deputy Chair appointed by the Vice-Chancellor
A University External Examiner appointed by the Academic Board
All Chairs of Undergraduate Programme Examination Boards
The Secretary to the Board will be the Academic Registrar or nominee.

•

The quorum for the Board is 50% of eligible members.

Programme Examination Co-ordinators, and the Academic Registrar (or nominee)
will normally be in attendance. Where a Examinations Board is not quorate, the
Academic Registrar (or nominee) will make a judgement based on the attendees
whether the board can go ahead, with the caveat that any formalties to be agreed by
correspondence for absent members.
10.4 The membership of the University Postgraduate Examinations Board shall be
as follows:
•
•
•

Chair and Deputy Chair appointed by the Vice-Chancellor
An External Examiner appointed by the Academic Board
All Postgraduate Course Lead
The Secretary to the Board will be the Academic Registrar or nominee.
The quorum for the Board is 50% of eligible members. Programme Examination Coordinators, the Head of Registry will normally be in attendance.
10.5 The membership of the University PGCE Examination Board shall be as
follows:

•
•
•

Chair and Deputy Chair appointed by the Vice-Chancellor
An External Examiner appointed by Academic Board
All PGCE Course Leads
The Secretary to the Board shall be the Academic Registrar or nominee.
The quorum for the Board is 50% of eligible members. All PGCE Course Leads and
the Academic Registrar will normally be in attendance.
10.6 The Board will round module marks to the nearest integer when making
decisions about borderline classifications.

G11. University Extenuating Circumstances Panel
11.1 All Extenuating Circumstances claims will be logged centrally and reviewed by
Registry and presented to the University Extenuating Circumstances Panel for
consideration
11.2 Membership of the Panel

77

The University Panel established to consider Extenuating Circumstances claims will
comprise:
1. a chair, who should be a senior a member of staff, from Registry or a Faculty
2. a representative from each School
3. a clerk to record the outcomes and recommendations of the Panel
11.3 Terms of Reference
The functions of the Extenuating Circumstances Panel are:
•
•

•

to establish that the evidence is valid, i.e authentic and appropriate and that it relates
to the assessment in question and that it has been submitted by the required date
to review Extenuating Circumstances claims and evidence and make
recommendations to the University Examination Board whether or not individual
claims should be accepted
to make recommendations to the Academic Registrar for improvements to the
effectiveness and efficiency of the procedure.
Submissions must be made with supporting evidence; where evidence is awaited,
the University Extenuating Circumstances panel may defer decisions, and authorise
the Chair to act on their behalf without calling a further panel.

G12. Assessment Information for Students
12.1 Each department will be responsible for ensuring that module and programme
guides are produced which will inform students in advance how and when their
learning will be assessed. This information provided for students should include (as a
minimum) details about:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

the aims and learning outcomes of the subject or programme as a whole and those
for individual modules
the purpose, methods and schedules of assessment, during and at the end of a
module or programme
the format of assessment tasks and the deadlines for submission
any group projects and methods for assessment; information about the
apportionment of marks
criteria for assessment (including details about expected levels of achievement);
the weightings for different elements of assessment
the procedures for submitting coursework
the procedures for applying for permission for late submission of coursework owing
to extenuating circumstances
the marking and assessment mechanisms which will be used
78

•
•

the Guidelines for Students for Academic Misconduct.
learning resources
12.2 Programme documentation shall make explicit for each module which elements
contribute to the final mark and the weighting given to each element.
12.3 Where there are specific programme/module level attendance requirements
which exceed those identified in Section B Regulation 3 of the Academic
Regulations, the documentation must specify the minimum or particular attendance
requirements and any penalties attached to inadequate attendance.

G13. Student Performance in Undertaking Assessments
13.1 Students must undertake all assessments at the first available opportunity. A
student failing to submit for assessment will be allocated a fail grade unless they
make a successful claim for extenuating circumstances.
13.2 It shall be the responsibility of the candidate to ensure that they attend for
examination at the prescribed place and time or submit work for assessment at the
time and in the manner stipulated by the Course Lead/ Module Convenor as
appropriate.
13.3 During Examinations students shall observe the Instructions to Examination
Candidates.

G14. Non-Submission of Coursework
14.1 Students who fail to submit coursework by the deadline set by the Programme
will receive a grade of zero for that assessment. Resit penalties will be applied
unless the student makes a successful extenuating circumstance claim for a resit
without penalty.

G15. Late Submission of Coursework
15.1 Extensions for coursework can only be considered in accordance with the
Guidelines for Extenuating Circumstances or any late submission policy operated by
the Course or wider university.

G16. Module Failure
79

16.1 In cases where a candidate has failed a particular module, the Programme
Examination Board shall recommend that the candidate shall either:
1. re-submit for the failed module with consequent assessment penalty
or
2. re-submit for the failed module with no assessment penalty where the
Extenuating Circumstances Panel has approved an application for resit without
penalty or
3. take a replacement module
or
4. that, where there is no further resit or retake opportunity and it is a core
module, the student's programme be terminated.
16.2 Alternatively the Programme Examination Board may recommend what other
assessment and/or attendance is necessary if the candidate is to pass the module.
16.3 No candidate shall be required by these Regulations to re-take a particular
failed module unless it is designated as a core for the particular Programme of Study
which the candidate is following, and for which no compensation has been granted.

G17. Resitting Passed Modules
17.1 A candidate who has passed a particular module shall not be permitted to retake the assessment for that module, unless a resit without penalty has been granted
due to a successful claim for extenuating circumstances.

G18. Entitlement to Resits of Failed Assessment
18.1 Undergraduate students and those on postgraduate programmes who have
failed a particular module, and/or have been recommended for a resit following a
finding of academic misconduct, shall have the right to resit the assessment
Students following a postgraduate programme study will be given two opportunities
to pass a module.
Students on undergraduate programmes of study will be given three attempts to
pass a module.
Where Extenuating Circumstances are applied for and approved, this will usually
offer another resit opportunity
80

Where students have a resit as a result of an Academic Misconduct finding, the
opportunities for reassessment will be offered in line with the Academic Misconduct
policy.
18.2 Undergraduate students who fail at the resit may retake the module on one
further occasion only. Note this clause does not apply to students on the BSc
Physiotherapy programme
18.2 For Undergraduate students, the third and final attempt would normally be
undertaken in the following academic year.
18.3 PGCE students have the right of resit of two failed pieces of academic work
only.
18.4 The permitted timescale for re-takes at each level shall be subject to the
limitations on total programme length set out in the programme of study
requirements.
18.5 Resit fees may be required and students should refer to the Fees Policy.
https://www.stmarys.ac.uk/tuition-fees/about.aspx

G19. Penalisation of Marks for Resits
19.1 If a candidate is required to resit assessment or a student re-takes a failed
module, and where there are no Extenuating Circumstances approved by the
Extenuating Circumstances Panel , the mark gained in the resit or retake will be
capped at the pass mark for the assessment element for the purposes of calculating
the classification of any degree or other award.

G20. Timing of Resits
20.1 Students, who are required to resit a module, must do so at the next available
opportunity which will either be determined by the programme or during the formal
reassessment period as prescribed by the academic calendar for the period in which
the module is being attempted.
20.2 This may vary for students on Foundation FHEQ Level 3 programmes, or where
PSRB or other regulatory requirements apply.20.2 FHEQ Level 6 (Year 3) students
who fail a module in the first semester will be given an opportunity to resit the
81

module in the Semester 2 main examination period to enable them to graduate with
their peers if successful.

G21. Allocating a Grade for a Module where there are Extenuating
Circumstances
21.1 In cases of Extenuating Circumstances a Programme Examination Board may
recommend, at its own discretion, in the interests of the student, the award of a mark
for an individual module, without requiring all the items of assessment for that
module to be completed, provided 65% of the assessment for that module has been
completed on which a mark can be based.

G22. The Award of Undergraduate Compensation Credits
22.1 Where a student has shown strength in other areas marginal failure may be
compensated and compensation credits awarded within the parameters set out in
the programme of study.
22.2 Compensation credits will allow a student to progress from one year to the next,
or to be awarded a qualification where they are carrying a small amount of failure but
have demonstrated that they have successfully met all of the Learning Outcomes of
the course
2.3 Where compensation is applied, there is no need to further resit or repeat the
compensated modules. Compensated modules will be capped at a maximum of 40%
22.4 Module compensation will not be awarded for a module that forms a mandatory
part of a professional programme and is subject the regulations of any Professional,
Regulatory, Statutory Body as defined in the programme specifications.

23. Calculating where compensation can be applied at
Undergraduate and Foundation level.
23.1 Compensation may be applied where a student has achieved a mark of at least
30% overall for a module where the following conditions have been met. Note:
programmes accredited by Professional, Statutory and Regulatory Bodies (PSRBs)
may have rules on Compensation that supersede University regulations.

82

1. Students are required to achieve a mark of at least 30% in each substantive
element of assessment. A substantive element of assessment is that which
carries at least 35% or more of the total module weighting.
2. All elements of a module must have been attempted.
3. Compensation can be applied where a student has achieved a mark of 1% to
30% in a non-substantive element of assessment (i.e. worth less than 35% of
the overall marks) Where a student has not submitted against the element of
assessment, compensation cannot be applied.
4. Students may be compensated for no more than 40 credits at each level of
study, or for a total of two modules, whichever is the lesser.
5. Where students are studying two subjects, no more than 20 credits may be
compensated per subject of study.
6. Compensation will be applied at the undergraduate semester two exam
boards where the full profile of marks achieved across the academic year are
considered. Compensation credits are therefore only applied at the point of
progression or award for undergraduate students.
7. Compensation will not usually be applied at the undergraduate semester one
exam board. Students who fail modules in semester one will have the
opportunity to retrieve any failed modules during the next available
reassessment period.
8. Module compensation may not be awarded for the independent study module
(also known as a Dissertation) at FHEQ Level 6 (Year 3).
9. Where multiple modules have been failed, the course team will decide which
two modules should be compensated in consultation with the student. The
student will be required to resit or repeat any additional failure.
10. Where a student has passed a module at 40% but failed one or more
elements of the assessment, a pass will be agreed as long as the student has
achieved no less than 30% in any substantive element of assessment (with
the exception of 40 credit Dissertation or Independent Report modules)
11. Where a student has failed a non-substantive assessment but passed the
module overall with 40% or more, a pass will be agreed as long as the failed
elements of assessment has been submitted against.
12. When module compensation is awarded, the raw mark gained for the module
will stand and will be used for classification of the award where appropriate.
13. Where module compensation has been applied, a student may nonetheless
choose to resit the module. The marked gained in the subsequent resit will
capped at the pass mark unless a successful Extenuating Circumstances
claim is applied.
14. Compensation can be applied after a first attempt or following resit.
15. Only students who have successfully passed 80 credits or more will be
eligible for compensation and this will allow them to progress to the next level
of study or to receive an award. Students who have passed 60 credits or less
will not be deemed to have met the learning outcomes of the programme and
will need to repeat the year with or without attendance.
83

16. Compensation will not be applied where there is a finding of Academic
Misconduct or an Extenuating Circumstances claim relevant to the module,
Note: Where there is clear evidence that the students’ ability to complete one of the
assessment components may have been impacted by severe extenuating
circumstances that it was not possible to mitigate against during the module (e.g.
through submission deadline extensions), then the Programme Board may, at its
discretion, allow the module to be compensated so long as the student has gained a
mark of 30-39% in assessments weighted at 60% or more of the overall module
mark.

23.2 Compensation for LLB Law programmes
The Solicitors Regulation Authority deems that providers should only allow students
one opportunity to compensate a Foundation of Legal Knowledge (FLK) module
across the full three-year period of their degree. This would normally be expected to
be at Level 5 or Level 6 so that the opportunity to compensate is not used too early
in a student’s period of study. The decision to allow a compensation will be made by
the University Exam Board where they are assured that the student has met the
learning outcomes of the module, and has a strong mark profile and shown good
progression in other core, optional or FLK modules.

G24. Illness or Extenuating Circumstances Affecting Ability to
Undertake Assessment
24.1 Students may apply to defer an examination or submission of coursework
where they have a valid reason for doing so through illness or Extenuating
Circumstances. Such requests must be submitted on the required form and be
accompanied by independent third party documentary evidence. Such requests must
be made prior to the examinations (excepting cases where it can also be evidenced
that this was not possible – for example, due to hospitalisation) in order to be
considered by the Extenuating Circumstances Panel. Examples of acceptable forms
of “independent, third party documentary evidence” are given in the Extenuating
Circumstances Policy.
24.2 Where requests for deferred examinations or other assessment are not agreed,
students will be allocated a fail grade if they fail to attend the examination and/or
submit the work, and any resit mark will be penalised as set out in Section G
Regulation 19.

G25. Illegible Scripts
84

25.1 It is the candidate’s responsibility to ensure that answers provided in
examination scripts are legible and can be marked accordingly. Only black, blue or
blue-black ink or biro should be used except where additional colours may be
needed in diagrams, etc.
25.2 The Programme Examination Board reserves the right to return a mark of zero
if the script is considered by the Programme Examination Board to be illegible.
25.3 At its discretion, the Programme Examination Board may require the candidate,
at their own expense, to reproduce the answer in legible form under such conditions
and within a timescale as specified by the Board.

G26. Extenuating Circumstances Affecting Students as a Group
The university may consider the impact of the extenuating circumstances on the
entire group when making a decision. Provision may be made to grant extensions,
allow repeat or resit opportunities to the whole group or more usually the individual
affected. The member of the group affected by the ECs should be able to show clear
evidence of how their ECs impacted their ability to participate in group work.
Individual resit work may be given to allow the rest of the group to progress.

G27. Alternative Assessment for Modules Failed Owing to
Extenuating Circumstances
27.1 The Programme Examination Board may also require an alternative form of
assessment for all or part of a module e.g. a viva, provided that any alternative form
of assessment for an individual student does not disadvantage students who have
completed the module entirely satisfactorily. The decision of the Programme
Examination Board should be reported to the appropriate University Examinations
Board.
27.2 Where an alternative assessment is provided no additional tuition fee will be
charged.

G28. Recommendation for Award where Students are Unable to
Complete Owing to Extenuating Circumstances
28.1 In cases where a student has completed most of the requirements for an award,
but due to Extenuating Circumstances has been prevented by illness or other
incapacity from completing all of the assessment requirements for an individual
85

module(s) (in no circumstances exceeding 30 credits), the University Examinations
Board may exceptionally recommend that the student should receive the award.

G29. Academic Integrity Regulations
29.1 The University expects that all its members, both staff and students, adhere to
the principles of Academic Integrity defined as a commitment to the values of
honesty, trust, fairness, respect, and responsibility.
The University takes allegations of academic misconduct extremely seriously since
such acts:
•
•
•

threaten the credibility, integrity and standards of the University’s awards if students
gain credit for work which is not their own;
cast doubt on a student’s commitment and responsibility to their learning as well as
their personal integrity;
represent an unfair advantage over other students
It will be regarded as academic misconduct for any candidate to commit an act
whereby they seek to obtain for themselves, or for another candidate, an unfair
advantage. Academic misconduct shall be taken to include the acts defined in
Section 30 below,and will attract the penalties correspondingly set out in this section.
All references in these Regulations to academic misconduct will be taken as acts
that fall within the definitions set out in Section 30.
29.1.1 Artificial Intelligence
Because of dynamic developments in technology, and uncertainties around the
reliability of screening software, cases where the allegation (see 30.2.2) involves the
use of Artificial Intelligence (AI) will be screened by a Faculty Screening Panel
convened and chaired by the Academic Integrity Leads in the first instance. No
referrals of this type will be accepted by Registry unless via this route. All other
referrals can be made directly to Registry.
To support academic staff in the referral of cases associated with AI, the purpose of
the Faculty Screening Panel is to review the evidence to assess whether it is (a)
sufficient to justify a formal referral and (b) in contravention to the relevant school or
programme policy on the usage of AI. Students do not attend the Faculty Panel.

86

•

If the Faculty Panel rejects the allegation of Academic Misconduct, either the original
mark should be awarded, or an approach to poor academic practice may still be
taken if there are sufficient grounds (see 30.1). See our AI Guidance
for further information.
29.2 Consequences of breaching regulations on Academic Integrity
Students should be aware that the consequences of a finding of academic
misconduct can be severe and could result in their programme of study being
terminated.
29.3 Extenuating Circumstances
A student may not present extenuating circumstances in mitigation of any type of
academic misconduct.
29.4 Application of penalties in the case of multiple referrals
In cases where a student has multiple referrals at the same time they will be treated
as one case. Where a student has had a first finding of academic misconduct and,
subsequent to that finding, has been referred for a second time that will be treated as
a second case.
Where a student has a finding of academic misconduct in one programme and,
subsequently, transfers to another programme, that finding will remain on the record,
and any finding of academic misconduct on the new programme will be treated as a
second (or sequential) finding.
29.5 Consequences of Programme Termination
29. 5.1 Any student whose programme of study has been terminated by the
University Examination Board on the recommendation of an Academic Misconduct
Panel will not be eligible to transfer their credits to another programme of the
University, or to be accepted on to another programme of the University. If a student
successfully appeals their termination on the grounds of academic misconduct
however, they would be permitted to rejoin the course or transfer to another one.
29.5.2 Students who withdraw from the University prior to a finding of academic
misconduct being determined can reapply to the University to rejoin the same

87

course, but will be required to resit or resubmit the element of assessment against
which the finding was made, and this would be capped.
29.6 Penalties
The Penalties for breaches of the Regulations relating to Academic Integrity are as
set-out in Section 30 (below). They will be applied in strict accordance with the
nature of the academic misconduct or breach of the regulations that has been found,
and the number of previous findings. These penalties will only be applied by a
formally constituted panel.
29.7 Professional statutory and regulatory bodies (PSRBs)
University penalties for academic misconduct are separate from any similar
sanctions that may occur as a result of PSRB requirements.
29.8 Whistle-blowing
If a student has any concerns about potential wrongdoing within the University by
other students, university employees, officers, casual workers, or agency workers
then these should be raised through the University’s student complaints procedures.
In cases where a student or third party draws attention to alleged infringements
against the Regulations relating to Academic Integrity, the University reserves the
right to investigate the alleged infringement(s) via a formally constituted Academic
Integrity Panel.
29.9 Post-graduation Revocation of Degrees
The University reserves the right to revoke a degree or other award if it is found that
a student has committed an act or acts of academic misconduct either during their
time as a student of the University or if an act of academic misconduct has been
committed following graduation (ie in support of the academic misconduct of a
current student). This includes circumstances where a graduate has aided acts of
plagiarism/collusion by other students either at the University or at other educational
Institution. The evidence associated with such cases will be investigated and
reviewed by a formally constituted Academic Integrity Panel.

88

G30. Possible infringements and Penalties for breaches of Academic
Integrity Regulations
30.1 Poor academic practice vs academic misconduct
The University draws a distinction between poor academic practice and academic
misconduct. The prior experience(s) of the student, their level of experience at
St Mary’s (e.g. the level of study) and the degree to which they have had
opportunities to learn about and practice the principles of good academic practice
can be drawn upon when making such a distinction. For cases of Poor Academic
Practice please see Guidance Poor Academic Practice.
30.2 Possible infringements
The University recognises that infringements of these regulations may take many
different forms. Therefore, the following infringements are identified to assist Panels
in making judgments and imposing the most appropriate penalties. The summary is
intended to ensure consistency in the application of penalties across the University,
and to ensure that no student is unfairly penalised. Infringements are classified as
‘Low’, ‘Medium’ or ‘High’ level – with the three ‘levels’ indicating the seriousness of
the breach. Example infringements are given below.
30.2.1 Low level infringements
•
•
•

•

•

Use of sources without quotation marks but referenced in the bibliography.
Copying from sources without referencing appropriately.
Submission of the student’s own previously or simultaneously assessed work for
another assessment, whether previously/simultaneously submitted to the University
or another institution (i.e. self-plagiarism).
Collusion i.e. two or more students having worked together inappropriately on an
assessment to jointly produce work that is intended as an independent submission
according to the requirements of the assessment.
Obtaining an unfair advantage for another student by allowing them to copy one’s
own work and present it as their own.
30.2.2 Medium level infringements

•

For a formal timed assessment, introducing into the examination room any
unauthorised materials such as manuscripts, printed text, books, dictionaries, selfproduced cribsheets, calculators and other electronic devices such as mobile
phones, and any other materials excluded by the regulations. This includes use of
89

•

•

•
•
•

•

any such materials when outside the examination room for any reason during the
period of the examination.
Contracting another source to produce work which is presented as the student’s
own, or utilising artificial intelligence platforms to generate text which is submitted
(either whole or in part) as the student’s own work.
Breach of ethics or ethical procedures committed as part of any research, survey,
investigative activity, data gathering or other information gathering work as part of an
assessment or other part of the programme of study, or committed as part of any
activity not sanctioned by the programme.
Use of another person’s copyrighted materials, intellectual property or ideas
presented inappropriately as the student’s own.
Falsification/fabrication of research or practical work data, results (including those of
interviews) and other outputs in an assessment.
Obtaining, or seeking to obtain, questions in advance of a formal timed assessment,
including from someone who has already seen the questions, whether for oneself or
on behalf of another student.
Falsification/fabrication of materials associated specifically with work/practice
placement or workplace learning such as timesheets and workplace supervisor
assessments.
30.2.3 High level infringements

•
•
•

Knowingly allowing another person to impersonate oneself in a formal timed
assessment, submission of coursework, or other aspect of the programme of study.
Impersonating another student in a formal timed assessment, submission of
coursework, or other aspect of the programme of study.
Bribing or attempting to bribe a person thought to have an influence on an
assessment outcome.

30.3 Escalation of penalties
The University recognises that not all instances of academic misconduct are of equal
seriousness and the penalties are reflective of this fact.
30.3.1 Low level instances will be penalised in the following way:
•

•

•

For a first finding, the work will be awarded a mark of zero for the assessment and
given the opportunity for a right of resit, although the resit will be capped at the pass
mark.
For a second finding, the work will be awarded a mark of zero for the assessment
and given the opportunity for a right of resit, although the resit will be capped at the
pass mark.
For a third finding, the student will have their programme terminated.
90

30.3.2 Medium level instances will be penalised in the following way:
•

For a first finding, the work will be awarded a mark of zero for the assessment and
given the opportunity for a right of resit, although the resit will be capped at the pass
mark.

o

The sole exception being breaches of ethics, where the panel will have greater
flexibility to determine the most appropriate penalty, which will be consistent with the
severity of the breach. For example, in cases where a breach causes actual harm to research
participants, the panel may determine that programme termination is the most
appropriate penalty.

•

For a second finding, the student will have their programme terminated.
30.3.3 High level instances will be penalised in the following way:

•

For a first finding, the student will have their programme terminated.
The penalties above are indicative and each panel will consider the specifics of the
case and the extent of the material the student has used inappropriately in making
it’s judgement.

30.4 Penalty Tariffs
The Penalties that may be applied by an Academic Integrity Panel are as set out
below. As indicated in Section 29.6 (above), the penalties set out below may only be
imposed by a formally constituted Academic Integrity Panel.

Level

1

Low

Case

First finding

Second

Third

finding

finding

Use of sources without

A mark of zero

A mark of

Programme

quotation marks but

for the

zero for the

termination

referenced in the

assessment with

assessment

bibliography.

a right of resit.

with a right
of resit.
Resit

91

2

Low

Resit capped at

capped at

pass mark.

pass mark.

Submission of the student’s

A mark of zero

A mark of

Programme

own previously or

for the

zero for the

termination

simultaneously assessed

assessment with

assessment

work for another

a right of resit.

with a right

assessment, whether

Resit capped at

of resit.

previously/simultaneously

pass mark.

Resit

submitted to the University

capped at

or another institution (i.e.

pass mark.

self-plagiarism).

3

Low

Collusion i.e. two or more

A mark of zero

A mark of

Programme

students having worked

for the

zero for the

termination

together inappropriately on

assessment with

assessment

an assessment to jointly

a right of resit.

with a right

produce work that is

Resit capped at

of resit.

intended as an independent

pass mark.

Resit

submission according to the

capped at

requirements of the

pass mark.

assessment.

4

Low

Obtaining an unfair

Finding of

A mark of

Programme

advantage for another

academic

zero for the

termination

student by allowing them to

misconduct with

assessment

copy one’s own work and

no penalty.

with a right

present it as their own.

of resit.
Resit

(Note: Where it is not

capped at

possible for the Panel to

pass mark.

determine which student
produced the original work,

92

both students will be
penalised.)

5

Low

Copying from sources

A mark of zero

A mark of

Programme

without referencing

for the

zero for the

termination

appropriately

assessment with

assessment

a right of resit.

with a right

Resit capped at

of resit.

pass mark.

Resit
capped at
pass mark.

6

Medium

For a formal timed

A mark of zero

Programme

assessment, introducing

for the

termination

into the examination room

assessment with

any unauthorised materials

a right of resit.

such as manuscripts,

Resit capped at

printed text, books,

pass mark.

dictionaries, self-produced
cribsheets, calculators and
other electronic devices
such as mobile phones, and
any other materials
excluded by the regulations.
This includes use of any
such materials when
outside the examination
room for any reason during
the period of the
examination.

93

N/A

7

Medium

Contracting another source

A mark of zero

Programme

to produce work which is

for the

termination

presented as the student’s

assessment with

own (this includes use of

a right of resit.

contract cheating

Resit capped at

services/sites, and/or

pass mark.

N/A

artificial intelligence
platforms).

NOTE: REFERRALS
INVOLVING ARTIFICIAL
INTELLIGENCE WILL
ONLY BE ACCEPTED
FROM FACULTY
SCREENING PANELS

8

Medium

Breach of ethics or ethical

The panel may

Programme

procedures committed as

exercise its

termination

part of any research,

discretion based

survey, investigative

on the severity of

activity, data gathering or

the breach.

N/A

other information gathering
work as part of an
assessment or other part of
the programme of study, or
committed as part of any
activity not sanctioned by
the programme.

9

94

Medium

Use of another person’s

A mark of zero

Programme

copyrighted materials,

for the

termination

intellectual property or

assessment with

ideas presented

a right of resit.

N/A

10

11

12

Medium

Medium

Medium

inappropriately as the

Resit capped at

student’s own.

pass mark.

Falsification/ fabrication of

A mark of zero

Programme

research or practical work

for the

termination

data, results (including

assessment with

those of interviews) and

a right of resit.

other output in an

Resit capped at

assessment.

pass mark.

Obtaining, or seeking to

A mark of zero

Programme

obtain, questions in

for the entire

termination

advance of a formal timed

module with a

assessment, including from

right of retake of

someone who has already

the module.

seen the questions,

Retake of

whether for oneself or on

module capped

behalf of another student.

at pass mark.

Falsification/ fabrication of

A mark of zero

Programme

materials associated

for the module

termination

specifically with

with a right of

work/practice placement or

resit. Resit

workplace learning such as

capped at pass

timesheets and workplace

mark.

supervisor assessments.
Note: in cases
where such an
infringement
would constitute
a serious breach
of PSRB
'standards'

95

N/A

N/A

N/A

(where these
apply) the
student's
programme of
study will be
terminated at first
finding.

13

High

Knowingly allowing another

Programme

person to impersonate

termination

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

oneself in a formal timed
assessment, submission of
coursework, or other aspect
of the programme of study.

14

High

Impersonating another

Programme

student in a formal timed

termination

assessment, submission of
coursework, or other aspect
of the programme of study.

15

High

Bribing or attempting to

Programme

bribe a person thought to

termination

have an influence on an
assessment outcome.

30.5 Academic Appeal
Following the imposition of a Penalty by the University, a student has the right to
submit an appeal against any penalty in accordance with the University’s Appeals
Policy.
96

G31. Programme Termination by the Examination Board
31.1 A decision to terminate a student's programme of study may only be taken by
the appropriate University Examination Board in the following circumstances:
1. on the recommendation of the Programme Examination Board where a student
has failed a core module and no further retakes are possible;
2. where a student has undertaken no assessment for a particular semester or
where there is negligible achievement, or where all right of resit has been
exhausted and where no evidence of extenuating circumstances has been
presented;
3. where they have not completed a programme within the timescales permitted
in the Programme of Study Regulations;
4. where an offence of Academic Misconduct has been committed for which
programme termination is the penalty;
5. where an offence of Academic Misconduct has been committed for which the
penalty does not permit the resitting of a substantive assessment on a core
module.
When making decisions regarding termination, the University Examination Board
will consider the whole of a student's profile.
Decisions to terminate a student’s programme may be rescinded by the Chair of the
University Examination Board acting on delegated authority of the Board where
extenuating circumstances are presented which the student was not able to reveal
previously for valid and evidenced reason(s). Such actions will be reported to the
next meeting of the appropriate University Examination Board.

Section H: Assessment Criteria for
School Experience
H1. Assessment Criteria for School Experience for BA Primary
Education with QTS, BA Primary Education with QTS (Work Based
Route) and PGCE with QTS

97

1.1 The criteria for each of the Teachers’ Standards is laid down by government
regulation and set out in the Programme Handbooks. The Consolidation School
Experience will be assessed as a pass or fail.
1.2 For the purposes of the Foundation and Development placement, a trainee's
progress will be recorded as a Pass if sufficient progress has been made within the
phase of training. In the event of insufficient progress being made within the phase of
training, a Fail will be recorded. Thereby, the trainee will not be able to progress to
subsequent phase of training.
1.3 School Experience will be assessed in accordance with the ITE Assessment
Framework, which is conducted by University Tutors in partnership with School
Mentors.
In order to pass a School Experience module, students must pass the point of
assessment as set out by the Programme. By the final School Experience all of the 8
Teachers’ Standards, including Part 2 of the Teachers’ Standards (DfE2012) must
be successfully met.
Students who do not meet the requirements for any of the Standards will have failed
the School Experience.

H2. Unsatisfactory Progress in School-based Assessment
2.1 Where students are deemed to be making unsatisfactory progress in their School
Experience, an Additional Support Plan will be implemented to set out improvement
targets, as detailed in programme guidelines. If the targets are not met, within a
given period of time, this may result in an escalation of support and potentially a
failed School Experience module.

H3. Withdrawal from School Experience
3.1 A student who withdraws from a School Experience module without the
agreement of the Subject Lead will fail the School Experience.

98

3.2 Where a student withdraws from a School Experience with the agreement of the
Subject Lead they will be offered an opportunity to resit this part of their programme
of study.

H4. Resit of School Experience
4.1 A student has the right to resit only one unsuccessful School Experience module,
which will usually incur a resit fee.
4.2 Where a student has failed their School Experience, the School Experience
Review Panel may determine that there are Extenuating Circumstances and that the
student should be offered a resit without fees.
4.3 The School Experience Review Panel comprises:
•
•

A member of the appropriate Partnership Team
Subject Lead from the relevant programme.
4.4 The resit of the School Experience will take place at the next appropriate
opportunity.
4.5 Where a student is permitted to resit a period of School Experience, the student
will normally have to pay for this unless they present extenuating circumstances
acceptable to the School Experience Review Panel.
4.6 Where a resit-student fails one or more of the School Experience Teachers’
Standards, their programme will be terminated by the appropriate University
Examination Board on the recommendation of the Programme Examination Board,
unless acceptable mitigating evidence has been presented to the School Experience
Review Panel.
4.7 Where a student has failed two School Experience placements with no
extenuating circumstances they will automatically fail the programme subject to
ratification by the appropriate University Examination Board. BA Primary Education
with QTS students in this position may transfer to a non-QTS programme.

H5. Removal from School Experience
5.1 The School may ask for a student to be removed from the school at any time with
immediate effect on the grounds of the pupils' learning or physical safety, the
99

students' professionalism or other issues of conduct. Where a student is removed
under such circumstances, they will be deemed to have failed the School Experience
module.
5.2 In extreme circumstances, where the University or the placement school has
received information or allegations of professional misconduct or other behaviour
which suggests that the pupils or members of staff at a school will be put at risk if the
placement continued, the Subject Lead will remove the student with immediate effect
following consultation with the Head of the School of Education.
5.3 Following the removal of a student in the circumstances in 5.2 above, the student
will be dealt with under the Student Conduct Procedure and/or the Fitness to
Practise Policy as appropriate.
5.4 Students withdrawn from a School Experience by the school and/or University
tutors, or who withdraw themselves, are usually deemed to have failed to meet the
requirement for successful completion of the School Experience module.

Section I: Regulations for Removal
from Placements
I1. Removal from Work Placement, School Experience or other
Professional Context
1.1 All periods of work placement, school experience or other experience in a
professional context will be governed by procedures which clearly set out the
responsibilities of the programme, the student and the supervisor or equivalent and
other designated individuals involved in the assessment of the placement.
1.2 Programmes which offer modules incorporating a work placement, school
experience or other experience in a professional context will have procedures for
dealing with issues of poor performance and or failure to observe standards of
professionalism, health and safety or putting other people at risk. With the exception
of situations where it is felt that the student and/or others may be put at risk, these
procedures must allow for a warning to be issued to students with targets for
improvement.

100

1.3 In extreme circumstances, where the University or the placement has received
information about, or allegations of, serious professional misconduct or other
behaviour which suggest that the clients or members of staff at a placement will be
put at risk if the placement is continued, the Subject Lead will remove the student
with immediate effect following consultation with the Provost. Such circumstances
may include students on QTS programmes who have been found or are suspected
of being in breach of the law with reference to teaching or working with children or
young people.
1.4 Following the removal of a student in the circumstances outlined in 1.2 and 1.3
above, the student will be dealt with under the University's Student Conduct
Procedure and/or the Fitness to Practise Policy as appropriate.
1.5 Where an allegation is proven, the student will automatically fail the module
concerned. Where they are not allowed a resit and the module is a core part of the
programme, their programme may be terminated by the relevant University
Examinations Board as appropriate.
1.6 In common with Academic Appeals, students who have been removed from a
work placement, school experience or other professional context have the right to
remain on their programme of study until the outcome of disciplinary and any
subsequent appeal is decided - except for students found to be in breach of the law
with reference to teaching or working with children or young people, and subject to
the provisions of paragraph 1.3 above. In the latter situations students may normally
continue on the taught components of their programme only and the matter will be
dealt with under the Fitness for Practise Policy. Students may not be allocated a
further placement until such time as any allegation is disproved.

101

Section J: Regulations for Appeal
against Decisions of the University
Examination Board
J1. Grounds
1.1 A candidate who has reason to believe that they have been incorrectly graded in
a particular module, or incorrectly failed, or awarded an incorrect class of degree
have in certain circumstances the right of appeal. Students should refer to
the Academic Appeals Policy for further details and guidance about submitting
appeals.
1.2 The grounds for an appeal may only be one or more of the following:
1.2.1 There is evidence that your assessment/examination may have been
adversely affected by mitigating circumstances which you were unable, or for valid
reasons unwilling, to divulge to the University Examination Board before its decision
was reached.
If appealing under this ground, please ensure that you have provided all of the
following:
•
•
•

New information which the Board has not previously considered
A reason and evidence to explain why you feel your performance may have been
adversely affected by factors evidenced in the information submitted
A reason and evidence to explain why you were unable, or for valid reasons
unwilling, to submit this information before the Board reached its original decision.
1.2.2 There is clear evidence of a significant administrative error on the part of the
University or in the conduct of the assessment/examination and that this accounted
for your performance.
1.3 Students may not appeal against the academic judgement of a marker or the
professional/academic judgement of an assessor of school experience or other
placement.
102

2. Right to Remain on the Programme
Students who have made an appeal against the termination of their programme of
study shall normally have the right to remain on their programme of study until the
appeal is decided (subject to Section I, paragraph 1.6 above).

Section K: Programme Administration
K1. Responsibility for Programmes
1.1 Each Programme shall be the responsibility of a Course Lead who shall be
responsible to the Head of Department for the management, organisation and
administration of the Programme, in consultation with the academic staff contributing
to all modules within the Programme, the Module Convenors.
1.2 Each module within the Programme shall be the responsibility of a Module
Convenor. The Module Convenor shall be a member of academic staff who
contributes to the teaching of the module. The Module Convenor shall be
responsible for the efficient organisation and administration of the module, for the
development and monitoring of the Module and for all assessment and assessment
procedures connected with the module, including oversight of the submission of
marks
1.3 Where a module is cross-validated to other programmes, the Course Lead will
consult these programmes regarding changes to the modules.

K2. Programme Boards
2.1 Each programme shall have a Programme Board for the purposes of
programme/module review and staff/student liaison. The composition of the
Programme Board shall be as follows:
Chair: Course Lead

Members:
1. Chair (usually an Associate Head of School or nominee) The Chair may be
from the same school or another school.
2. All Module convenors of modules being considered.
3. Any External Examiner or advisors appointed by the School or department.
4. Two student representatives across all levels of study.
5. A secretary responsible for recording any actions or taking minutes
103

50% of members should be in attendance to achieve quoracy.
Where modules are cross validated to other programmes, the module convenors
should attend the programme boards of these programmes.
2.2 Minutes and Actions shall be maintained for each Programme Board. Each
Programme Board shall meet at least once per semester.
2.3 The agenda should cover: review of previous actions; review of individual
modules and student feedback; course lead’s report; reports from student
representatives; update on any actions from External Examiner reporting; review of
learning resources including the VLE.

K3. Administration, Monitoring and Management
3.1 The overall responsibility for subjects and programmes offered by the University
rests with the Academic Board.
3.2 Quality Assurance and Enhancement matters, including the oversight of
validation and review, shall be the responsibility of the Quality and Standards team.

Section L: Regulations for External
Examining
L1. General Principles
The purposes of the system of external examining are to ensure, first and foremost,
that Degrees and other academic qualifications awarded in similar subjects are
comparable in standard in different universities and institutions of higher education in
England, though their content will vary: and secondly, that the system of assessment
is fair and is fairly operated in determination and, where appropriate, classification of
awards made to students.
1.1 For all taught programmes of study leading to an award of St Mary’s University,
there shall be at least one External Examiner. No academic qualification should be
awarded without participation in the examination and assessment process by at least
one examiner external to the University.

104

L2. Appointment
An External Examiner under these Regulations shall be appointed by the Faculty
Quality, Curriculum and Student Experience Committee (QCSE).

L3. Eligibility
No person shall be eligible to hold an appointment as External Examiner if the
appointee:
i. teaches on the programme of study to which they are being considered for
appointment;
ii. holds a teaching or other appointment of the University or has held such an
appointment within five years prior to the date of commencement of the proposed
appointment as external examiner;
iii. is a close relative of a member of the programme team or of a student, or has an
association with the nominating programme which could compromise their role and
independence as external examiner;
iv. has served as External Examiner for the same programme within the previous five
years (Regulation 5 refers);
v. already holds two or more other concurrent appointments as an External
Examiner.

L4. Period of Appointment
An External Examiner shall be appointed for a period of up to four years in the first
instance. In exceptional circumstances, a further extension of appointment by one
year may be permitted by Deputy Academic Registrar (Quality and Standards). Such
extensions are permitted in exceptional circumstances only.
5. An individual, who has previously served as External Examiner for a programme
of study and whose appointment has ended with or without extension, may not
normally be considered for appointment as External Examiner for a further period
until at least five years shall have elapsed.

105

6. An External Examiner shall be appointed for a programme of study as a whole but
may be appointed with particular reference to one or more components within the
programme of study. The number of External Examiners for a particular programme
of study shall be sufficient to reasonably cover the range of studies and/or the
number of students involved, whilst being able to maintain a reasonable overview of
the programme of study as a whole.

L7. Documents to be provided to External Examiners
7.1 Following the approval of a nomination by the Quality, Curriculum and Student
Experience Committee, the External Examiner will be sent a formal letter of
appointment, together with a copy of the Academic Regulations and any other
appropriate guidelines.
7.2 The programme shall send to an External Examiner a copy of the currently
validated programme and module specifications, the programme and module
handbooks and any other information pertinent to their duties as External Examiner.

L8. External Examiners Role and Responsibilities
8.1 An External Examiner shall receive all draft examination question papers for the
modules they are to examine. An External Examiner shall comment on the question
papers and approve them, with modifications if necessary.
8.2 An External Examiner shall have the right to see all examination scripts and
coursework and performances/presentations (and as such, appropriate recordings
should be made). An External Examiner may choose to receive a selection of
scripts/coursework. Where a selection of scripts/coursework is to be made, the
principles for such selection shall be agreed in advance between the External
Examiner and the Programme Director. As a general principle, this selection should
include the full range of grades.
8.3 Where an External Examiner determines that a selection of scripts/coursework is
to be made, they shall be satisfied that they have sufficient evidence to determine
that internal marking is of an appropriate standard and is consistent. An External
Examiner shall, as a minimum requirement, review the scripts/coursework of a
sample of candidates assessed internally at the top, the middle and the bottom of the
range. The sample should normally include candidates assessed internally as having
106

achieved first class or distinction marks/grades, fail marks/grades or borderline
pass/fail marks/grades.
8.4 An External Examiner shall be a Full Member of the appropriate Programme
Examination Board. They shall be entitled to be present at meetings of the
Examination Board. An External Examiner shall normally attend meetings of the
Examination Board at which final examination results are to be considered.
8.5 Agreement to Mark Sheets – Each External Examiner present at the meeting of
the Programme Examination Board shall append his/her their signature to the mark
sheets as evidence that they accept the results. If an External Examiner is unwilling
to sign a mark sheet they shall report the reasons to the Academic Registrar at the
earliest opportunity. The Academic Registrar shall investigate the matter and
recommend action to the appropriate University Examination Board and the
Academic Board as appropriate.
8.6 An External Examiner shall be invited to comment at the final meeting of the
Programme Examination Board on any matter relevant to the scheme of
assessment. When, for whatever reason, an External Examiner is unable to attend a
meeting of an Examination Board, they should be invited to provide, prior to the
meeting, feedback on the assessments they have moderated.
8.7 Viva Voce Examinations – An External Examiner shall have the right to be
present at and participate in any viva voce examination. Where Programme
Regulations prescribe a viva voce examination for all candidates, it shall be agreed
with an External Examiner in advance which they shall attend.
8.8 An External Examiner shall make a written report annually to the Vice-Chancellor
Using pro-forma provided by the Quality and Standards Office, the External
Examiner may include observations on the assessment process, the schemes for
marking and classification, and on aspects of the teaching, structure and content of
the programme as they affect the assessment of the students.
8.9 The Academic Registrar shall ensure that the reports are made available to the
appropriate Head of Department, who shall, in turn, ensure that they are considered
by the Programme Board and any necessary action taken. Reports should also be
made available to student representatives, generally in the following academic year.
107

L9. Confidentiality of Report
External Examiners’ reports, submitted in respect of the University’s awards, shall be
regarded as confidential to the University. External Examiners’ reports may,
however, be made available to programme boards and students, validation panels,
to the appropriate statutory or professional bodies, to representatives of the Office
for Students (OfS) and to enquirers under the Freedom of Information Act.
In accordance with the General Data Protection Regulations, 2018, information
within the report relating to named, individual students or members of staff may be
redacted before being made available to those individuals on request.
Any queries regarding the above should be made in writing to the Academic
Registrar.

L10. External Examiners for University Examination Boards
An External Examiner will be appointed to each of the University Examination
Boards. The key roles of these External Examiners are to ensure that: (i) awards are
made consistently and fairly within institutional regulations (ii) institutional regulations
are broadly comparable to those in force in other reputable UK Higher Education
Institutions.

•
•
•

•

In order to fulfil this role, taught awards board External Examiners shall:
comment upon the assessment regulations, especially those concerned with
progression, compensation, and award classification;
contribute to the meeting of the appropriate University Examination Board;
make judgements upon issues relating to assessment regulations and assessment
processes and decision making as specified in the external examiners’ report form
and submit this report to the Provost;
submit confidential reports to the Provost on any regulatory matters on which they
have serious concern and which put at risk the standards of awards of the University.
University Examination Board External Examiners will normally be appointed by the
Academic Board from among the External Examiners of programmes reporting to the
particular University Examination Board. They will serve a term of three years,
extendable by one year.

108

Appendix A
Definitions
Throughout these Regulations the terms set out below shall only be understood to
have the specific definitions listed below.

1. Modular Structure
1.1 Module
1.1.1 A module is a unit of assessed learning which leads to the achievement of
approved learning outcomes. Each module is assigned a credit value according to
the total number of hours of student work (or “learning hours”) which it involves.
Learning hours comprise contact with academic staff, plus self-directed study. Each
credit represents around 10 hours of student work; thus a 20-credit module
represents 200 learning hours. The amounts of (a) contact time and (b) self-directed
study should be stated within the module outline.
1.1.2 120 credits are associated with the successful completion of one year of fulltime study at undergraduate level. 180 credits are associated with the successful
completion of one calendar year of full-time study at Masters’ level.
1.1.3 Timetabled teaching sessions are included within expected student study time,
though their proportion may vary from module to module. Expected student
attendance and study time includes, where relevant, all classes, practical work (both
assessed and non-assessed), tutorials, assignments, private study, and assessment.
109

It is assumed that 100 hours represents one-twelfth of a reasonable annual full-time
undergraduate student workload.
1.2 Subject
1.2.1 A subject is a co-ordinated area of modules which may be taken in approved
combinations to lead to an award. Subjects may include modules from other subject
areas where they are accepted as fulfilling part of the credit requirements for a
particular programme of study. A module may therefore appear in more than one
subject, especially those that are interdisciplinary.
1.2.2 In some instances a subject and a programme of study will correspond to a
defined programme of study. Other subjects will contain several routes, which may
be taken either on their own or in combination as a programme of study.
1.2.3 All subjects will be governed by a set of Programme Specifications which may
vary some of these Regulations, for example where there are additional professional
requirements.
1.3 Route for BA/BSc Programmes
A route is the approved combination of modules within a Subject. The routes
available are single honours, equals, major or minor. The route may be taken either
on its own (in the case of single honours) or in an approved combination with
another Subject in the case of joint honours to lead to an award.
1.4 Pathway
A pathway is an approved selection of related modules within a Subject route. The
pathway will be approved at validation and may be set out in the Programme
Specification but it will not appear in the award title.
1.5 Programme of Study
The programme of study is the approved combination of Subject routes leading to an
award. Subject route combinations will be approved by the Academic Board.
1.6 Award

110

The award is the qualification that students will gain at the end upon successful
completion of their studies e.g. BA, BSc, FdA, FdSc, DipHE, PGCE, MA, MSc etc.
1.7 Core
The core is made up of specified modules which are compulsory for a particular
subject route. The Programme Specification will indicate which modules are core.
1.8 Pre-requisite Module
A pre-requisite module is one which must be satisfactorily completed before
commencing a specified module at a higher level. The Programme Specification will
indicate which modules are pre-requisites.
1.9 Co-requisite Module
A co-requisite module is one which must be taken at the same time as another
module. The Programme Specification will indicate which modules are co-requisites.

2. Levels of Study
2.1 The academic standard of each module, including the standard of its
assessment, shall be designated as being at a certain Level. There are six levels:
Level 3 FHEQ for Foundation Year, Level 4 FHEQ for Year 1 of undergraduate study
followed by Level 5 FHEQ and Level 6 FHEQ for Years 2 and 3 of undergraduate
study; and FHEQ Levels 6 and 7 for PGCert and Masters level study respectively.
2.2 Levels FHEQ 4 and 5 (formerly HE Levels 1 and 2) represents the standard
designated as equivalent to that of study in years one and two respectively of a fulltime honours degree Programme.
2.3 FHEQ Level 5 and FHEQ Level 6 represent the standards designated as
equivalent to those of study in years 2 and 3 of a full-time honours degree
programme. Marks achieved on modules at these levels will be used for honours
classification, see Section C Regulation 21.
2.4 Level HE G (FHEQ Level 6) represents the Postgraduate Certificate in Education
and the Professional Certificate in Education.

111

2.5 Level FHEQ 7 represents the standard appropriate to a Taught Postgraduate
Programme.

3. Assessment
3.1 Assessment A generic term, encompassing all forms of evaluation of learning,
this may include assessment by written papers (timed or untimed), practical
laboratory work, coursework, projects, portfolios, oral presentations, poster
presentations, independent study etc.
3.2 Element of Assessment Used to denote each component part of the assessment
prescribed for a module.
3.3 Examination This is restricted to a formally convened, timed assessment of a
module under the direct supervision of appointed invigilators and normally organised
through the Examinations Office.

4. Periods of Study
4.1 Academic Year
This is the period from 1 August to 31 July, incorporating the beginning of the First
Semester to the end of the Second Semester.
4.2 Calendar Year
A period of 12 calendar months, (January to December inclusive unless otherwise
stated).

112
