Education EnhancementUse of Gen-AI in learning & assessment

Student FAQs

What is Generative AI and how does it work?

Generative AI or Gen-AI are tools or services that create content for users in response to prompts they've been given. Gen-AI tools and services generate content, such as text, images, or music, or translate between languages based on the data they were trained on, the prompts they are given, and the algorithms they are programmed to work to. This short module built by students at the University of Sydney, provides a helpful introduction to Gen-AI and explains how it works.

Which Gen-AI tools can students use?

There has been huge growth in the number and range of Gen-AI tools and services (and other tools and services which have incorporated Gen-AI into their processes) over the past few years. Whether you can or should use a particular Gen-AI tool or service will depend on a number of factors, including the nature of the task you are facing, the learning objectives that are associated with that task, and your Department’s expectations around how you should complete that task. Your module and/or programme leader will make it clear whether or not the use of Gen-AI in general and any Gen-AI tools or service in particular is permitted when they explain the task they are asking you to complete.

There are a wide range of Gen-AI tools and services available, most of which require an account and/or subscription. The only Gen-AI tool that the University currently allows staff and students to sign-up to with their University credentials is Microsoft Copilot in Edge. You can access this through the Edge browser when you are signed into to your University Microsoft account. Please note that at the time of publishing this guidance, students who are under the age of eighteen are not permitted to use Microsoft Copilot in Edge while logged into their University Microsoft account. If this condition changes, this guidance will be updated and students and staff will be informed. Staff and students will also have access to the in-built Zoom AI Assistant while using Zoom. You should follow the guidance provided by their module and programme leaders on when the use of this tool is (and isn’t) appropriate in their studies.

You should be aware that there are risks associated with using any Gen-AI tool, especially those that they are signing up to without the University’s explicit knowledge and support. Guidance on using Gen-AI tools safely and responsibly and some critical questions about using Gen-AI are provided in the additional resources section of this page. You should read this guidance before using any Gen-AI tools in their learning and assessment tasks.

Finally, you should note that the recent growth in the availability of (often) free to access Gen-AI tools may not last forever, and that charges for use and the disappearance of tools and services are always possible. This means that any dependency on these tools or services that is built up now could be damaging to your learning and development in the future.

Does the use of Gen-AI compromise my academic integrity or mean that I am cheating?

Not necessarily, but you should always ensure that you are aware of the expectations of the module or programme leader around the use of Gen-AI and understand what is required of you in any given learning or assessment task. Consult your module handbook and Myplace site for guidance and ask for clarification if you need it.

Can Gen-AI help me to learn?

Gen-AI tools, used carefully and responsibly, could be helpful in a wide range of learning contexts. Gen-AI tools may help you understand some concepts, or create study materials, summarise complex topics, and so on, but you should always be aware of the fact that Gen-AI tools can be biased, inaccurate and misleading in their outputs. Ensure that you are always thinking critically about information you know has been produced using Gen-AI and fact check anything you intended to rely on. You also need to be sure that you are not undermining the learning process. Follow the guidance that your module or programme leader has provided for you, they will have thought carefully about the learning or assessment task and will know whether the use of Gen-AI is (or isn’t) appropriate in that context.

Can I use Gen-AI to help me with writing and creating other content I will submit for an assessment?

The work you submit for assessment should always be your own. Depending on the context, the use of Gen-AI may be permitted, but not always, so you should ensure that you know what is allowed. If you are not sure, ask your module or programme leader for guidance.

While Gen-AI tools can write and create other content quickly, and sometimes this content is impressive, there can be significant flaws in these outputs, including (among other things) inaccuracies in information, harmful biases, and issues with focus and structure. You should not assume that Gen-AI content is perfect or even good enough or that the act of creating it has helped them to learn. Staff guidance on the use of these tools and services to create content in relation to a particular learning or assessment task should be followed. This guidance reflects the staff members’ experience and expertise in the subject you are studying and has been given to support students’ learning and development.

What is meant by thinking critically about Gen-AI output?

Gen-AI tools and services are prone to offering responses which contain inaccurate or biased or misleading information. Gen-AI tools can also generate fake references that look genuine and may even contain some correct details such as real author names or journal titles. Always check the original source to verify outputs. Do not simply accept Gen-AI outputs as fact or authority.

Make sure that you question assumptions and claims; fact-check key points; seek out diverse perspectives; evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of arguments, and think about how the information has been presented, including the structure and tone of the writing. This critical thinking requires subject or ‘domain’ knowledge which you will be developing through your studies and will help you ensure that you continue to develop a well-rounded understanding of the material you are studying.

In short, do not allow any Gen-AI tools or services to think for you or create work which isn’t yours or the result of your efforts.

Is it ethical to use Gen-AI?

Before using Gen-AI tools or services, there are a number of ethical questions you should consider. Six of the most important questions are outlined in the Essential Questions to Consider document below. The University takes a principled approach to the use of Gen-AI in all Learning and Teaching contexts. These principles can be viewed below in the Principles document. All uses of Gen-AI by students (and staff) should align with these Principles. Ultimately, the question of how ethical it is to use Gen-AI tools and services will depend on a range of contextual factors. In general, however, use of Gen-AI when it undermines important learning and assessment outcomes, when it might be considered unnecessary or frivolous, when it is used to mislead or deceive in any way, not disclosing the use of Gen-AI when this is required, and in any circumstances where the module or programme leader has prohibited its use could be unethical.

What are the consequences of unethical Gen-AI use?

Unethical use of Gen-AI undermines your learning and could even contribute to the erosion of trust and compromise the quality of the higher education system. Where the misuse of Gen-AI has been identified, the University’s Academic Misconduct Procedure will be followed, which could lead to a range of penalties for any individual who is found to have committed academic misconduct. Ensure that you follow assessment instructions and University policies at all times.

Is my data safe and secure when I use Gen-AI tools and services?

Gen-AI tools may collect user data. Read privacy policies carefully and avoid sharing Personal, sensitive or copyright protected information. Make sure you are not giving any tools or services access to restricted or copyright protected content including materials provided to you by the University (for example lecture slides, assessment questions or feedback on assessment, library resources or research papers).

What are the legal considerations with Gen-AI?

Gen-AI models can generate content that may infringe upon existing intellectual property rights, such as copyright. To ensure that you do not do anything unlawful, you should follow the advice and guidance provided to you by your Department and the University. This Generative AI and Copyright libguide provides an overview of copyright and privacy issues.

What are the university’s policies on using Gen-AI?

The University’s guidelines on academic integrity can be found on the website. You should check this guidance regularly and especially whenever you are completing a new piece of work involving Gen-AI, as it is a rapidly evolving area, and the guidance may have changed since you last checked it. You should also check the rules and guidance for each individual assessment as these may vary. Details will be published in programme and module handbooks and Myplace pages.

Where can I get help with Gen-AI tools?

The University has provided a range of guidance and support through this FAQs page and the related resources. An introduction to Gen-AI can be found on MyPlace. If you have further questions or concerns, you should contact your module or programme leader for help.

Further information

- Essential questions to consider before using Gen-AI tools in your work

- Using Gen-AI tools safely and responsibly in your learning and assessments

- What to do when using Gen-AI tools

- Generative Artificial Intelligence and Copyright

- MyPlace class: Introducing Students to Generative-AI

- Microsoft Copilot
