STUDENT ACADEMIC MISCONDUCT POLICY
2025-26

1. POLICY PURPOSE
1.1 This Policy is designed to set out the principles and processes to be followed when students
are
alleged or known to have engaged in academic misconduct. The University is committed
to
maintaining high standards of academic integrity and ensuring that all students are assessed
fairly.
Academic misconduct reflects on the individual as well as the University, the subject area
and professional community students are part of. It also has the potential to causes distress, discomfort
and a sense of injustice in students and others who demonstrate integrity in their approach to learning and
assessment. This Policy must be read alongside the Student Casework Shared Principles and
Requirements Policy.
1.2 Academic misconduct includes, but is not limited to, plagiarism, collusion, cheating, unauthorised use
of AI and fabrication of data. The University will take appropriate action to address any instances of
academic misconduct.

2. POLICY STATEMENT
2.1 In practice, engaging in academic misconduct will be seen as an attempt to gain unfair advantage and
is classed as engaging in conduct which falls below the expected standard at the University.
2.2 In most cases academic staff will identify academic misconduct, but if a student sees or hears of
another student engaging in academic misconduct, or becomes aware of concerns around the integrity of
another student’s work, as a minimum they should take advice from a personal academic tutor, module
tutor or the Student Casework Team. The ‘conduct’ (which is another word for behaviour) may or may not
be serious, but consideration needs to be given as to whether the potential conduct requires a discussion
with the student(s) who have behaved in a way to raise concerns, and whether it needs to be investigated
in more detail.

3. SCOPE
3.1 This Policy applies to all students studying on and off the University’s UK campuses, and on taught
foundation, undergraduate and taught postgraduate programmes, research degrees, professional
doctorates, short courses, apprenticeships, continuing professional development courses and, where
applicable, former students of the University. The Policy will be reviewed no later than academic year 20272028, and as required ahead of this date.
3.2 This Policy applies to the preparation and presentation of all assessed work, including but not limited
to written and oral examinations, including those undertaken electronically and remotely, and other timeconstrained assessments, coursework, essays or assignments, projects, dissertations, practical work,
placement or field trip reports and the production of creative work.

3.3 Modifications to the application and interpretation of the Policy may be made where the operation of
flexible (for example distance, TNE or other partner based programmes) have implications for the
practicability of operating the standard arrangements. Any required modifications must gain advance,
written approval from the Academic Registrar or their nominated deputy, and assurance would be given
that fairness to those subject to the Policy is maintained.

4. RECOGNISED DEFINITIONS
Academic misconduct is defined as any attempt by a student to gain unfair advantage in any piece of
assessment. ‘Academic Integrity’ is at the opposite end of a spectrum of behaviours which amount to
academic misconduct, as the positive values and honesty displayed by students in engaging in their
studies and producing assessed work. A non-exhaustive list of types of academic misconduct is as
follows:
a. Poor Academic Practice is defined as a student’s unfamiliarity with how to prepare and present
academic work – this may arise when a student submits for assessment without
acknowledgement of the source or ideas within that work, or acknowledgment of the attribution
of levels of collaboration with other students.
b. Academic misconduct is defined as any attempt by a student to gain an unfair advantage in any
piece of assessment. An extensive, but not exhaustive list is outlined below of examples; this may
include:
c. Plagiarism may be defined as the representation of another person’s work, without
acknowledgement of the source, as the student’s own. Examples of plagiarism include, but are
not limited to:
i.

ii.

Copying the work of another person without acknowledging the published source
through the appropriate form of citation; - the summarising of another person’s
work by simply changing a few words or altering the order of presentation,
without acknowledgement;
The use of ideas or intellectual data of another person without acknowledgement
of the source, or the submission or presentation of work as if it were the student’s
own, which are substantially the ideas or intellectual data of another person; the
submission of coursework making significant use of unattributed digital images
such as graphs, tables, photographs, etc. taken from books/articles, the internet
or from the work of another person.

d. Self-plagiarism – submitting the same work that a student has already submitted and gained
credit for in another assessment in a different module or for a different programme when this is
not explicitly permitted within a module guide or programme handbook.
e. Deliberate Attempt to Avoid Detection by Originality Software - Submitting pictures of text, or
hidden text, within an assignment to hide plagiarism or collusion, artificially increase or decrease
the word count, or any other attempt to bypass originality detection.
f.

Collusion - where two or more students collaborate to produce a piece of work which is then
submitted as though it were an individual student’s own work; collusion does not apply to
assessment components which specify group submissions. If a student knowingly makes work
available to another student, this is minor collusion (see section I below). If a student uses the
work of another student this is serious collusion (see section m below).

g.

Falsifying data, evidence or experimental results (either qualitative or quantitative), through
invention or amendment, which is then presented by the student as if it had been legitimately
gathered in line with the norms of the discipline concerned; or a failure to provide raw data used
for research work when requested to.

h. Ethics approval -conducting research and data collection without prior ethical approval, where it
is explicitly required.
i.

Confidentiality - Breaching patient, pupil, client or participant confidentiality.

j.

Commissioning – involves requesting another person or electronic assistant to complete an
assessment which is then submitted as the student’s own work; Commissioning or requesting an
artificial intelligence/machine learning system (e.g. Chat-GPT) rather than a person to produce
work which then you submit in full or in part as your own is considered to be equivalent. The work
commissioned from another person can be defined as either paid or unpaid and is classified under
commissioning whether the work is submitted as the student’s own or not.

k.

Unauthorised use of AI to write or substantially contribute to the creation of an assignment, in
contravention of the assessment brief where the student then submits this as their own original
piece of work.

l.

Posting an assessment brief on a commissioning website.

m. Theft of work – submitting another student’s work as the student’s own, either in whole or in part,
without that student’s permission.
n. Making your own work available to another student for them to submit as their own work.
o. Copying another student’s assignment either in whole or in part even where the other student
has given permission
p. Bribery and blackmail - paying or offering inducements or coercing another person, in order to
obtain higher marks or another form of advantage such as the advance viewing of examination
questions.
q. False declarations – falsification of documents including fraudulent extenuating circumstances
claims, falsifying evidence in support of extenuating circumstances claims or signatures on
documents such as time sheets or practice assessment documents to gain academic
advantage.
r.

Additional material in examinations - taking into any examination - on campus or online - any
unauthorised notes or other unauthorised material, including electronic devices capable of
storing and retrieving data.

s.

Unauthorised devices - the use of an unauthorised dictionary or electronic device and/or the use
of unauthorised programmes on electronic devices, including algorithms on calculators or
watches that have been programmed prior to the assessment.

t.

Communicating or attempting to communicate in any way (oral, written, electronic, nonverbal)
with another person during an examination or test except where the examination rubric permits
this e.g. group assessments.

u. Copying or attempting to copy from another student sitting the same examination or test.

v.

Impersonation - being party to impersonation where another person sits an examination or test
in the place of the actual student or a student is knowingly impersonated by another.

w. Leaving the examination or test venue to refer to concealed notes or other unauthorised
material or purporting to take the exam other than in the designated exam space or contrary to any
other requirement of the Assessment Policy and related Academic Regulations.
x.

Removal of items - taking rough notes, stationery, scripts or examination or test papers, which
indicate that they are not to be removed, away from the examination or test venue.

y.

Disruptive behaviour – behaving in a manner which would cause disruption to others in a shared
examination setting.

z.

Acting so as to gain an unfair academic advantage by any means other than those set out above.

5. PRINCIPLES
5.1 The ‘burden of proof’ rests upon the University that academic misconduct has taken place, and the
‘standard of proof’ is the ‘balance of probabilities’ whereby an evidence-based judgment is made as to
whether the misconduct is more likely to have taken place than not.
5.2 The University will ensure that all allegations of academic misconduct are investigated thoroughly,
fairly, and as promptly as is feasible.
5.3 In the interests of ‘natural justice’, students will be informed of the allegations against them and will
be given the opportunity to respond.

6. RESPONSIBILITIES
6.1 Academic staff are responsible for reporting allegations of academic misconduct, and designated
staff for its investigation.
6.2 Students are responsible for maintaining high standards of academic integrity and adhering to this
Policy.

7. MINOR AND SERIOUS ACADEMIC MISCONDUCT CRITERIA
Poor Academic Practice – Code- Minor (M0)
7.1 Markers, Invigilators, and standard External Examiners are responsible for identifying suspected
cases of poor academic practice or misconduct, and reporting them to the relevant Module Leader(s).
7.2 For TNE and UK collaborative partner students, off-campus Markers must inform the Sunderlandbased Module Leader of suspected cases, conduct interviews if needed, and submit completed
paperwork
7.3 The Module Leader will assess the severity of the suspected misconduct and initiate the relevant
procedure.
7.4 Poor academic practice applies when plagiarism or collusion is limited, particularly at early stages of
study. It is identified when a student has referenced material but not indicated verbatim quotes.

Academic Misconduct
7.5 To determine the severity of the alleged academic misconduct please see below:
Plagiarism Minor (M1)
i.
ii.
iii.
iv.
v.

Small amount of work reproduced without appropriate acknowledgement.
Unlikely intention to deceive.
No previous formal offence.
First semester/stage of the programme.
Study levels 3 and 4

Plagiarism Serious (S2)
i.

Significant amount of work reproduced without appropriate acknowledgement.

ii.
iii.
iv.
v.

Likely or proven intention to deceive.
Previous formal offence.
Later stages of the programme.
Normally study level 5 and above

Other forms of Minor Academic Misconduct:
Collusion (M2) - Collaborative work is apparent in a few areas, but possibly due to lack of
student’s/students’ awareness/making work available to others without considering the risk of collusion.
Falsification of Data (M3) - Substantial part of the data is original to the student.
Self-Plagiarism (M4) - A small amount of work already submitted as part of a previous credited assessment
is being passed off as new work for another assessment.
All Examinations and In-Class Assessments (M5) i.
ii.

Communicating with someone other than the invigilator during an examination or in-class
assessment on unrelated matters.
Unauthorised material taken into the exam is not relevant or the student can prove it is
unintentionally used.

Other forms of Serious Academic Misconduct:
Collusion (S2) - Collaborative work reflects significant similarities, and is probably due to a deliberate
attempt to share / use another student’s work even if the student consents to this.
Falsification of Data (S3) - A significant amount of data is found to be fabricated.
Ethical Practice (S3) - Conducting research and data collection without prior ethical approval, where it is
explicitly required. May include a breach of patient, participant, subject or client confidentiality.
Self-Plagiarism (S4) - A significant amount of work already submitted as part of a previous credited
assessment is passed off as new work for another assessment.
Commissioning / Contract Cheating (S5) - Work commissioned from another person and submitted as the
student’s own, whether or not payment is made or offered/requested.

Theft of work (S6) - Someone else’s work is taken without permission and passed off as the
student’s own.
False Declarations (S7) - False information or documentation is knowingly presented to the University in
order to seek gain and academic advantage, for example in relation to Time sheet or Practice Assessment
Documents (PADS) Extenuating Circumstances and Academic Appeals.
Bribery and Blackmail (S8) - Academic advantage is sought through inducement or threats to others.
All Examinations and In-Class Assessments (S9) –
i.
ii.
iii.
iv.
v.
vi.

Communication during examination or in-class assessment in order to seek or gain academic
advantage.
Possession and/or use of unauthorised notes or other material (including in electronic format on
a calculator or watch) in order to seek academic advantage, whether they are used or not.
Attempting to copy from another student in the examination or in class assessment.
Misuse of examination or in-class assessment briefs, for example gaining prior knowledge of
contents of unseen paper.
Allowing another person to take the examination or in-class assessment on the student’s behalf.
Taking material away from examination or test when instructed not to.

Unauthorised Use of AI (S10) - Submission of work created wholly, substantially and/or partially using AI,
in contravention of the assessment brief where the student then claims this to be their own original piece
of work.
Any other intentional attempt to gain an unfair academic advantage (S11) - Being party to any other
arrangement that would constitute a breach of these procedures to gain an unfair academic advantage.

8. PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES FOR MINOR CASES
8.1 The Module Leader should notify the student and arrange an interview within two weeks of initial
marking, giving at least three working days’ notice.
8.2 The student must be informed of the suspected misconduct, the offence code, and its description to
prepare for the interview.
8.3 If a face-to-face meeting is not feasible, alternative online means such as Teams/Zoom/Skype,
telephone, or email correspondence would only be offered in exceptional circumstances when all other
avenues have been exhausted.
8.4 The student should have the opportunity to have a support accompany them who should be a member
of university community (e.g. another student, a staff member or a Student Union advisor) who has no
conflict of interest relating to their current case.
8.5 If a student fails to attend two interviews without attempting to reschedule, the Module Leader will
impose an offence code, (see section 7) and this will be communicated in writing to the student.
8.6 The student interview should be documented, and the Module Leader will decide whether to:
a. Dismiss the case, for instance due to lack of evidence
b. Apply a minor offence outcome
c. Escalate the case to serious if warranted

8.7 If the student does not agree with the offence code and/or outcome the Module Leader offers; the
student can request their case to be considered at a Desk Based Panel. They will have the opportunity to
provide a written statement and/or previous unconsidered supporting evidence, but the student will not
be invited to attend.
8.8 If a minor case is dismissed by the Module Leader, no further action is required and no note will be
added to a student record.
8.9 Where following the meeting as outlined above, the following outcomes are available and are applied
at the discretion of the Module Leader. The outcomes can consist of more than one outcome.
Poor Academic Practice and Minor Misconduct Outcomes
P0 - No punitive outcome – case dismissed
P1 - Academic Counselling
P2 - Referral to Library Study Skills and / or Academic Misconduct Awareness Course
P3 - A request to rewrite the work, or section of work, taking into account the feedback on the poor
academic practice. The repeated work will be capped at the pass mark for the assignment.
Minor Misconduct
P4 - A marks deduction

9. SERIOUS CASES
9.1 The following procedures apply to all cases categorised as S1 to S11 serious offences in Section 7 of
this Policy.
9.2 An allegation form must be submitted with all supporting evidence to the Student Casework Team
which clearly states the allegation(s) of academic misconduct for a serious case process to begin.
9.3 Upon receipt of the allegation form, the Student Casework Team will assign an Independent Reviewer
who will invite the student to a meeting to investigate the allegation of academic misconduct. The
invitation should be sent within 10 working days of the case being assigned to the Reviewer.
9.4 The Independent Reviewer will meet with the student and document the meeting, including the
student’s response to the allegations, or the failure to attend if applicable.
9.5 The student should have the opportunity to have a support accompany them who should be a member
of university community (e.g. another student, a staff member or a Student Union advisor) who has no
conflict of interest relating to their current case
9.6 At the conclusion of the meeting, if there is a case to answer, the Independent Reviewer will confirm
the offence code with the student and impose an outcome (see below). The Independent Reviewer will
document the rationale for their decision. The outcome will be communicated in writing to the student
within 5 working days of the meeting.
9.7 Should a student fail to attend the initial meeting, a further meeting will be arranged. Should the
student fail to attend the further meeting then the Independent Reviewer will be able to impose an
outcome. The outcome will be communicated to the student in writing within 5 working days.

9.8 The student will then have 5 working days to challenge in writing the offence code and outcome
imposed by the Independent Reviewer. The student must provide a basis and evidence for such
disagreement. The student must send this to the Student Casework Team. In such cases, the matter will
then be escalated to a Desk-Based Panel. See Section 10. The student will then have the opportunity to
submit a written statement and/or supporting evidence for consideration by the Desk-Based Panel.5
working days in advance of the Desk-Based Panel or by the deadline issued by the Student Casework
Team. The Panel members will reserve the right to make a judgement as to whether evidence is accepted
if received after the 5 working days cut-off period.
9.9 The Independent Reviewer will also be able to send cases to a Desk-Based Panel where the allegations
are disputed by the student(s), or where any evidence submitted by the student require further review or
scrutiny.
9.10 Where following the meeting as outlined above, the following outcomes are available and are applied
at the discretion of the Independent Reviewer.
Serious Misconduct Outcomes
P0 - No punitive outcome – case dismissed
P5 - Failure in the element of assessment with reassessment right if eligible. Component of assessment
capped at 40 or appropriate pass mark for the module.
P6 - Failure in the element of assessment with reassessment right if eligible. Overall module mark capped
at 40.
P7 - Failure in the module (all assessment elements) with assessment right if eligible. Overall module mark
capped at 40.

10. DESK-BASED PANELS
10.1 The Desk-Based Panel will comprise of two academic staff members who will review cases in which
the student has rejected a proposed offence code and outcome.
10.2 Panel members will evaluate the documentation provided by the Module Leader, additional
information gathered by the Independent Reviewer, and any statements submitted by the student. The
student will not be invited to attend, but will have the opportunity to submit additional evidence and/or
supporting statement 5 working days in advance of the Desk-Based Panel or by the deadline issued by the
Student Casework Team. The Panel members will reserve the right to make a judgement as to whether
evidence is accepted if received after the 5 working days cut-off period.
10.3 Should the student fail to submit evidence and reasonable efforts have been made to contact the
student in advance of the Desk-based Panel to request their documentation, then the Panel may proceed.
10.4 If the two Desk-Based Panel members are unable to reach a consensus, a third Casting Vote Member
will be called upon to review the documentation and reach a final decision. The decision of the DeskBased Panel will be communicated to the student within 5 workings days. The student retains the right to
appeal at the faculty level within fifteen working days from the date of their outcome letter.

11. GROSS MISCONDUCT CASES
11.1 In serious cases where the Independent Reviewer regards an outcome of P8 or higher appropriate,
will going forward categorised as Gross Misconduct.

11.2 The Independent Reviewer, after meeting with the student, will provide a report detailing their findings
and will incorporate the student’s comments or mitigation. This will be included in the evidence portfolio
submitted to the full academic misconduct panel.
11.3 The student will be given 10 working days’ notice of the panel date.
11.4 The student will then be invited to submit their own statement or evidence and this should be sent to
the Student Casework Team 5 working days before the panel date.
11.5 The case will be heard at an Academic Misconduct Panel. The Panel comprises of the following three
members independent of the investigation which has taken place, and with no association with the student,
to enable them to make objective assessments based on the evidence and representations made at the
Panel meeting:
i.

Three appropriately trained and experienced academic staff members independent of any
involvement with the student or case to date, one of whom will act as Panel Chair and

ii.

One of the Presidents’ Union representative who may advise and support the student
attending the Panel to respond to the allegations of academic misconduct raised. See 11.4
above.

11.6 In exceptional cases where it might not be possible to secure the presence of the President of
Students’ Union or authorised nominee, the Academic Registrar or nominees may authorise a variation to
the Panel to include a third academic staff member. This Panel will convene within 15 working day of
receiving the Independent Reviewer’s report. The student will be invited to attend the panel meeting and
will be granted access to all relevant evidence to prepare.
11.7 The student will be invited to attend and can be accompanied by a Student Union representative or a
member of the University community for support.
11.8 After the student has presented their case and left the meeting, the panel will deliberate and decide
upon an outcome. The student will be informed of the Academic Misconduct Panel's decision in writing
within 5 working days. The student retains the right to appeal the decision at the faculty level within 15
working days from the date of the outcome letter.
11.9 Where following the meeting as outlined above, the following outcomes are available and are applied
at the discretion of the Academic Misconduct Panel.
Gross Misconduct Outcomes
P8 – Failure in the module (all assessment elements) with reassessment right if eligible. Overall module
mark capped at 40. Student will drop a degree classification within final award
P9 – Failure in module and programme with appropriate exit award. Student may be readmitted to the
University on a different programme
P10 - Recommendation of expulsion from the University with no exit award or right of readmittance

12. APPEALING ACADEMIC MISCONDUCT OUTCOMES
12.1 The student may appeal a penalty imposed if one or both of these grounds exist:
i.

Material Procedural Irregularity

ii.

Unconsidered Extenuating Circumstances

12.2 The Appeal will follow the Academic Appeal Policy route, and should be consulted. After
consideration at the appeal stage the student will be issued with a ‘Completion of Procedures’ letter which
will confirm that the University’s internal procedures have been completed, and which will enable them to
submit their case to the Office of the Independent Adjudicator For Higher Education (OIAHE) for
consideration as to its eligibility to be reviewed under its complaints scheme should they wish to do so.

13. REVIEW
13.1 This Policy will be reviewed regularly and annually where required, to ensure it remains current and
fit-for-purpose. A full review of this Policy will take place no later than academic year 2027-2028.

Effective Date: 01 September 2025

Owner: Academic Registry and Governance,
Student Casework

Last Revised Date: 24 August 2025
Required next Review Date: July 2027

Scope and Audience: University students,
staff, external representatives and bodies,
including OIAHE.

Approved by: Academic Board, 02 July

Version: 7
