Generative AI Procedure
Enabling Policy Statement; Our Data - Chief Operating Officer - Compliance Committee
Executive Owner;
Approval Route:
Is the Procedure for
Disclosable
internal use only (Nondisclosable) ?
Associated Policy
Our Colleagues - Chief Operating Officer
Statements:
Our Education - Pro-Vice Chancellor, Education
Our Operations – Chief Operating Officer
Our Research and Innovation - Pro-Vice Chancellor, Research and Innovation
Authorised Owner:

Chief Information Officer

Authorised Co-ordinator:
Effective date:
Due date for full review:
Sub documentation:

Head of Governance
18/12/2025
December 2026
TBC

Approval History
Version Reason for review
V1.0
New Procedure

Approval Route
Date
Compliance and Data Committee 18/12/2025

Generative AI Procedure
Version 1.0

1. Purpose
1.1. Generative Artificial Intelligence (GenAI) is redefining the way society, research,
education, and professional practice evolve. At the University of Surrey, we are
committed to leading its responsible and innovative application.
1.2. This procedure sets out how GenAI tools may be used within the University to
support teaching, research, and operations, while protecting information, complying
with legal and regulatory requirements, and maintaining academic and professional
integrity.
1.3. We encourage the informed and responsible use of GenAI. Our aim is for all at the
University to feel empowered to use GenAI in an informed and safe way and in line
with our core values.
1.4. All users must read and understand this procedure before engaging with any form of
GenAI during University work. Check the SURREYNET site for up-to-date information
and guidance on the use of GenAI at the University - Artificial intelligence at Surrey |
Surreynet

2. Scope and Exceptions to the Procedure
2.1.

This applies to:

2.1.1. All University of Surrey employees, subsidiaries, contractors, visiting
researchers and temporary employees
2.1.2. All GenAI use for university related work, teaching, research and
administration
2.1.3. The design, development, or deployment of GenAI enabled products or
services within the University context
2.2. This is the overarching procedure on GenAI at the University. Other AI related
guidelines, support information, training material are produced from time to time
and are available on the AI page on SURREYNET Artificial intelligence at Surrey |
Surreynet

3. Definitions and Terminology
3.1.

Generative AI: An AI system, tool, or facility that generates new outputs in a range
of possible formats such as text, images, or sounds (including for example music,
singing, voice narration).

3.2. Public/Open GenAI: AI services available via the internet that are not hosted or
controlled by the University.

4.

Procedural Principles
4.1. Three Golden Rules
4.2. Any use of GenAI tools at the University should be done following the University’s
three golden rules. ACT
4.3. Accountable - Take responsibility for GenAI-assisted work; apply human oversight
and verify outputs.
4.3.1. Human oversight: GenAI tools are not always going to get it right and cannot
be held accountable. It is essential to verify GenAI-generated results and
understand the limitations of the tools being used.
2

Generative AI Procedure
Version 1.0
4.3.2. Enhancing, not replacing: Use GenAI to increase efficiency and support human
decision-making rather than replacing critical judgment. This ensures that
expertise and context are applied to the results.
4.3.3. Environmental impact: Understanding the environmental footprint of GenAI
tools encourages responsible usage and consideration of sustainability.
4.4. Considered – avoid inputting sensitive data into unapproved tools; assess bias and
accuracy risks.
4.4.1. Protect Information: To reduce the risk of data breaches and misuse, personal,
confidential, and commercially sensitive information (including Intellectual
Property) must NOT be entered into GenAI tools—internal or external— unless
they are approved by IT Services and meet the organisation’s security and
compliance requirements.
4.4.2. Mindful input: Being cautious about what you input into GenAI tools is crucial
because GenAI generates responses based on its training data, which may not
always be accurate or appropriate.
4.4.3. Bias awareness: Recognising and mitigating biases in GenAI models helps
prevent discrimination and ensures fair outcomes.
4.5. Transparent – Clearly label and reference GenAI-generated content where
applicable.
4.5.1. Transparency: About the use of GenAI fosters trust and accountability.
4.5.2. Referencing GenAI: Clearly labelling GenAI-generated content helps users
understand the source and context of the information.
4.6. The use of GenAI tools at the University will be done so in line with the AI principles
the University has adopted.
4.6.1. Commitment to People-Centred AI
4.6.1.1. The use of GenAI at the University must serve the interests of
individuals and society, enhancing wellbeing, safety, and opportunity
while empowering users with oversight and choice.
4.6.2. Ethical Standards
4.6.2.1. All use, and development must be lawful, transparent, and respectful
of human dignity, in line with the UN Sustainable Development Goals
and the UK’s AI governance principles.
4.6.3. Promoting Inclusion & Diversity
4.6.3.1. The University values diversity in GenAI development and use and
will actively promote inclusive collaboration across disciplines,
backgrounds, and experiences. Teams engaged in GenAI related work
must foster equitable participation to ensure GenAI tools and
systems are fair, representative, and beneficial, avoid reinforcing bias
or discrimination, and be accessible to all.
4.6.4. Ensuring Responsible and Sustainable Deployment
4.6.4.1. GenAI technologies must be deployed responsibly and safely, with
clear consideration of their societal and environmental impact.
Engagement with internal and external stakeholders, including staff,
students, policymakers, industry, and the public will be integral to
shaping responsible GenAI practices and outcomes.
4.6.5. Embedding Transparency and Accountability
4.6.5.1. Clearly disclose when GenAI has contributed significantly to an output,
ensure traceability, and take responsibility for decisions informed by AI.
4.6.6. Establishing Responsible Governance & Oversight
3

Generative AI Procedure
Version 1.0
4.6.6.1. Follow University and regulatory frameworks for the ethical use of AI,
including risk assessment, approval, and monitoring of GenAI use.
This includes recognising that any use of GenAI in research involving
personal data requires prior ethics approval.
4.6.7. Fostering Lifelong Education and Adaptability
4.6.7.1. The University will promote continuous learning and the integration
of evolving best practices in GenAI across its community. Staff will be
supported through training and awareness programmes to remain
informed about current developments in GenAI ethics, safety, and
regulation, ensuring adaptive and responsible innovation.
4.7. Approved tools
4.8. The University helps protect our data and systems by maintaining a list of approved
tools that meet our security and compliance standards. Before using any GenAI or
digital tool, staff must check that it appears on this approved list, regardless of how
they access it — via software, web platform, mobile applications, or embedded
operating system feature.
4.9. Users are accountable for ensuring that any built-in or default GenAI functionality on
device is approved for handling University data and configured in line with security
and compliance requirements.
4.10. If you wish to propose a new tool or enable a GenAI feature for University use,
please ensure it first goes through the appropriate assessment process — including a
Vendor Risk Assessment (VRA) and a Data Protection Impact Assessment (DPIA) —
before contacting IT Services. Once assessments are complete, requests can be
submitted via the IT Service Desk for review and implementation. Any GenAI-related
tools, e.g. AdBlock, Grammarly, Adobe Flash, or software should only be installed,
connected, or enabled on University devices or networks once approved through this
process.
4.11. Any AI generated code for use within approved systems needs to be reviewed in line
with established code review practices before deployment.
4.12. User responsibilities
4.13. When using GenAI tools, you are responsible for:
4.13.1. Policy adherence: Follow all relevant University policies and guidance including
the above ACT guidance.
4.13.2. No prohibited data: Avoid entering Personal, Restricted and Confidential data
prohibited data into any Public/Open GenAI system.
4.13.3. Purpose alignment: Use approved tools only for purposes consistent with your
role and organisational objectives.
4.14. Data protection & privacy
4.15. All use of GenAI tools must comply with applicable UK Data Protection legislation
and University policies. For definitions of personal, restricted and confidential, and
for detailed handling requirements, see the Data Protection Guidelines.
4.16. Expected behaviours and example misuse cases
4.17. All members of the University community share responsibility for using GenAI tools
in ways that protect information and uphold our security standards. To support this,
please avoid the following practices:
4.17.1. Misuse of GenAI: Including, but not limited to:
4.17.2. Plagiarism or submitting AI generated work as your own without proper
attribution.
4.17.3. Amplifying bias or producing discriminatory, harmful, or unsafe outputs.
4

Generative AI Procedure
Version 1.0
4.17.4. Misrepresenting AI generated content as wholly human authored.
4.17.5. Generating content that breaches legal, ethical, or University standards.
4.17.6. Inappropriate purpose: Using GenAI for activities unrelated to legitimate
University business, teaching, learning, or approved research using University
provided facilities.
4.17.7. Safeguarding on personal devices: Users are accountable for safeguarding
University data when using personal devices. Using personal devices or
personal accounts to conduct University business via GenAI tools without
explicit approval is prohibited.
4.17.8. Uncontrolled code use: Introducing code generated by GenAI systems into the
University’s general technology environment is prohibited unless it has
undergone prior review and approval in line with established code review
practices. In isolated teaching environments (e.g., sandboxed labs or
controlled learning platforms), GenAI generated code may be used where
explicitly authorised and subject to appropriate safeguards.
4.18. Integrity & ethics
4.19. When using GenAI in research:
4.19.1. Disclosure: Disclose any use of GenAI tools in work produced and particularly
in research proposals, publications, and outputs, in line with University Policy.
4.19.2. Ethical review: Ensure AI assisted generated output complies with ethical
review processes and relevant legislation.
4.19.3. Verification: Verify the accuracy and originality of AI generated content before
inclusion in any outputs.
4.19.4. Rights and licences: Ensure training data and model use respect copyright,
licensing, and consent requirements, and that ethical considerations are
applied where GenAI is used to create, modify, or represent real people.
4.20. Compliance
4.21. Breaches of this procedure may result in disciplinary action in line with University
procedures.
4.22. Monitoring: Use of GenAI tools on University systems, networks or accounts is
subject to the University’s Acceptable Use Procedure and in accordance with the
University’s Monitoring Procedure and applicable law.
4.22.1. Passive monitoring may include the routine logging of access, usage patterns,
and system events to ensure security, compliance, and operational integrity.
4.22.2. Targeted monitoring may be undertaken where there is a specific compliance,
security, or investigative need, and may include reviewing the content of
prompts and responses.
4.23. All monitoring will be conducted lawfully, proportionately, and in line with data
protection requirements.
4.24. Third party risk
4.25. Before engaging external GenAI providers, ensure contracts include:
4.25.1. Data handling and retention: Terms aligned with University’s data policy.
4.25.2. Training restrictions: Prohibitions on using University data for model training
without explicit consent.
4.25.3. Bias and transparency: Commitments to bias mitigation and transparency.

5

Generative AI Procedure
Version 1.0

5. Governance Requirements
5.1. Implementation: Communication Plan
5.1.1. The procedure will initially be communicated in line with the communications
plan developed by the AI Operations Task and Finish group working with
Market and Communications and HR Organisational Development. It will
ensure all staff are aware of the procedure and will provide additional
guidance and training. The SURREYNET AI Intranet page will be used for
sharing of such information.
5.2. Implementation: Training Plan
5.2.1. Initial training advice, guidance, and materials on the use of the University’s
approved GenAI tools are being developed under the AI Operations Task and
Finish Group. Once implemented, these resources will be maintained through
established University governance and operational structures.
5.3. Sustainability
5.3.1. Environmental sustainability will be embedded within all University AI
decision-making and governance. Recognising the high energy and water
demands of AI technologies, the University will actively assess and report on
the environmental impact of AI tools and services, using available
Management Information and energy data. This information will guide
decisions in partnership with the Head of Sustainability and other key
stakeholders. The University will also promote responsible and efficient AI use
by training staff to understand the environmental cost of AI activity and to
make informed choices that minimise impact.
5.4. Review
5.4.1. This procedure will be reviewed annually, or sooner in response to regulatory
changes, to remain aligned with emerging GenAI advancements and ethical
considerations. The University will continue to adapt its approach to GenAI
governance, ensuring that our research and training reflect the highest ethical
and societal standards.
5.5. Legislative Context and Higher Education Sector Guidance or Requirements
5.5.1. The University will monitor development nationally and internationally
regarding AI governance as this is still an emerging and maturing area, such as
the EU AI Act.

6. Stakeholder Engagement and Equality Impact Assessment
6.1. The procedure has been developed with input from the AI Operations Task and
Finish group with representatives from across the University and with engagement
with the Surrey Institute for People Centred AI. An impact assessment will be
completed before final submission for approval.
6.2. An Equality Impact Assessment was completed on 11/12/2025 and is held by the
Authorised Co-ordinator.
6.3. Procedure communicated to all subsidiaries on 10/12/26.
6.4. Stakeholder Consultation was completed, as follows:

6

Generative AI Procedure
Version 1.0
Stakeholder

Nature of
Engagement

Request EB
Approval
(Y/N)
N

Date

Name of Contact

Governance

Review of draft
procedure

18/11/2025

Review of draft
procedure

N

18/11/2025

Kelley Padley,
Governance
Officer
Matt Purcell,
Director of H&S

H&S

Sustainability

Review of draft
procedure

N

18/11/2025

Academic
Freedom of
Speech
Operations
Committee
PVC
Education
PVC Research
and
Innovation

Review of draft
procedure

N

18/11/2025

Review of draft
procedure
Review of draft
procedure
Review of draft
procedure

N

16/9/2025

Martin Wiles,
Head of
Sustainability
Josh Andresen,
AFFE SubCommittee rep
Will Davies

N

10/12/2025

Annika Bautz

N

10/12/2025

Lisa Collins

7
