Understand what academic misconduct means at Sussex and what will happen if there is a concern about your work.

Examples of academic misconduct

Academic misconduct can be intentional or unintentional. It is defined by the Office of the Independent Adjudicator for Higher Education as:

“Any action by a student which gives or has the potential to give an unfair advantage in an examination or assessment, or might assist someone else to gain an unfair advantage, or any activity likely to undermine the integrity essential to scholarship and research.”

At Sussex, this includes, but is not limited to:

- plagiarism

- collusion

- personation

- fabrication

- unauthorised or inappropriate use of digital technologies, including artificial intelligence

- breach of in-person examination or test room protocols

- breach of research ethics.

All instances of academic misconduct are a threat to the integrity and fairness of the assessment process and value of the University’s awards, and breach our academic integrity values.

Academic integrity statement

The University values of academic integrity must be followed in all assessments. These values include honesty, trust, fairness, respect and responsibility.

You must complete your assessments alone (unless you have support agreed through the Student Support Unit, such as a scribe or prompter for an exam). Do not discuss it with other students before the window in which the assessment is available ends (e.g. 24 or 48 hours). Working with other students (giving or receiving assistance) in any way during this task is academic misconduct. You must not share your answers on social media during the exam window, or use someone else’s answers posted on social media.

Where academic misconduct is suspected it will be thoroughly investigated by your School following academic misconduct processes.

In completing your assessments you are agreeing to the following statement:

“I confirm that my work contains no examples of academic misconduct, such as plagiarism, collusion, exam misconduct, personation or fabrication of results. I understand that acts of academic dishonesty will be penalised in accordance with the University of Sussex’s Academic Misconduct Regulations.”

Please see the Skills Hub for guidance on academic integrity and how to avoid academic misconduct.

Levels of academic misconduct

Academic misconduct is categorised by levels of severity, depending on scope of the breach, any previous cases, and impact on the assessment; specifically, whether the breach fundamentally undermines the integrity of the work, confers an unfair advantage or otherwise presents a risk to the institution.

- Level 1 – limited

- Level 2 – significant

- Level 3 – severe.

Defining academic misconduct

Read these definitions carefully. The academic requirements of studying at Sussex may differ from where you’ve studied previously.

Plagiarism

Plagiarism is the use of others’ ideas, intellectual property or work (written or otherwise) without acknowledgement or permission. To copy sentences or phrases without proper acknowledgement of the source, is plagiarism. Plagiarism can also include paraphrasing someone else’s work without citing the original source. The act of presenting work that has been previously submitted for a different assessment, except where the nature of the assessment makes this permissible, is treated as ‘overlapping material’. Please see Marking, Moderation and Feedback.

Find out how to avoid plagiarism on Skills Hub.

Collusion

Collusion refers to the submission of substantially similar work produced in collaboration between two or more students, without approval. An act of collusion includes those who actively assist others or allow others to access their work prior to submission for assessment. In addition, any student is guilty of collusion if they access and copy any part of the work of another, regardless of whether permission was given.

Find out how to avoid collusion on Skills Hub.

Personation

Personation is the submission of work presented as a student’s own, which may be the preparation of the work, part of the work, or providing substantial assistance in completion of the work. This includes but is not limited to purchasing or commissioning of work, such as essays from essay banks or tutors, commissioning someone else to write an assessment or sit an exam, and/or breaches of the University’s guidance on proofreading. A fee does not have to be paid for personation to have taken place.

Find out how and why to avoid personation on Skills Hub.

Unauthorised or inappropriate use of digital technologies, including artificial intelligence

Misuse of digital technologies includes artificial intelligence.

Examples include:

- using AI or other digital tools, such as translation tools in an assessment where their use has been prohibited

- submitting AI-generated work, where this is permitted, without required acknowledgment.

Find out more about how to use generative AI tools appropriately in your work on Skills Hub.

Exam misconduct

Breach of in-person examination or test room protocols is having unauthorised materials (including books, notes on paper, or writing on the body), unauthorised calculators, mobile phones, internet-enabled devices and other prohibited electronic devices. Having these items on the student’s person after the start of the exam or test is a breach of protocols, regardless of whether or not they are accessed or are relevant to the assessment. Breach of in-person examination or test room protocols also includes improper communication during the assessment or copying the work of another student.

Find out how to avoid exam misconduct on Skills Hub.

Fabrication of results

Fabrication is the creation of false data, evidence, quotations, citations or other information in any assessed work. Fabrication may be the result of making up observations in practical, placement or project work, not accurately recording the outcome of a lab experiment, or using fabricated results or sources. Fabrication may also include the inappropriate manipulation and/or selection of data, imagery and/or research consent.

Find out why you should avoid fabricating on Skills Hub.

Breach of research ethics

Breach of research ethics on taught modules includes any breach of the University of Sussex Research Ethics Policy or Code of Practice for Research, and may include one or more of the following:

- failure to gain ethical approval

- carrying out research without appropriate permission

- breach of confidentiality or improper handling of privileged or private information on individuals gathered during data collection

- breaches of data protection legislation

- coercion or bribery of project participants.

Students conducting research or research-related activities as described in the University of Sussex Research Ethics Policy must gain ethical approval before carrying out the activity; this includes before contacting potential participants and/or advertising the study. Students are responsible for complying with the requirements set out as part of the approval process.

Tip: The best thing to do is learn how to avoid academic misconduct in the first place.

If you follow our guidelines you’re unlikely to have a problem.

Getting language tutorials and understanding UK academic culture can help if you are adapting to learning at Sussex.

If you’re notified of academic misconduct

You will normally be told by your School if there is a concern with your work.

If the person marking your work is concerned about academic misconduct, they will refer your assessment to an Investigating Officer, who will decide whether there is a case to take forwards. This depends on the extent and type of misconduct, and whether you have done it before.

You can contact your Academic Advisor if you want to discuss the process or check how to avoid academic misconduct in future.

First cases

If this is a first case of suspected academic misconduct and it is not categorised by the Investigating Officer as a “severe” breach, you will be asked to meet with the module convenor to discuss what happened during the preparation and submission of the assessment. A number of outcomes are possible:

- if you understand the concerns with the work and, even if unintentional, agree that academic misconduct did occur, then a fixed penalty will be given straight away

- if the concerns about the work can be reasonably accounted for in your explanation of what happened, and this does not amount to academic misconduct, then a face value mark that reflects the overall quality will be given

- if you do not attend or respond, or attend and disagree that academic misconduct occurred without a reasonable explanation of the issues in the work, then the work will go forward to an Academic Misconduct Panel for a full investigation.

After your first case meeting, you’ll likely be referred to an academic practice online workshop.

Email academicmisconduct@sussex.ac.uk if you don’t receive an invite or would like to self-refer on to a workshop.

Where the academic misconduct allegation relates to an in-person exam or in-class test reported by the Invigilator, the first case process will not require a meeting with the module convenor. Instead, your case will be processed by the Academic Misconduct Office on behalf of the Academic Misconduct Panel, and a fixed penalty will be given.

Academic misconduct panels

If the first case process does not apply to you, or you have disagreed about academic misconduct having occurred in your work, you’ll be invited to attend an academic misconduct panel and provide a statement. The statement should explain what happened and can help the panel understand your case.

Panel meetings are normally held online and typically last 30 minutes. The panel comprises a Chairperson and two panel members. There will also be a member of University staff taking notes.

Other people in the panel meeting can include:

- someone from your school presenting the information to the panel (normally the module convenor)

- a current Sussex academic, chosen by you, to help represent your case

- a Support and Advocacy advisor from the Students’ Union

- you, if you can attend.

If you attend, you’re able to give a better account of your case and answer any questions so this is encouraged but not required.

Exceptional circumstances

Academic misconduct panels cannot consider exceptional circumstances when making decisions. This is because, regardless of the reason for the misconduct, it either has or has not occurred and an unfair advantage has or has not been conferred as a result.

If you’re unable to complete an assessment because of your situation, you should make a claim for exceptional circumstances, rather than resort to academic misconduct.

Penalties

For a confirmed first case, you will receive a fixed penalty. For Level 1 cases of “limited” misconduct, the penalty will be a 10% point reduction in the mark. For Level 2 cases of “significant” misconduct, the penalty will be a mark of 0 for the initial attempt, and, depending on a number of factors, either a sit with a 10% deduction or a capped resit will be given.

For cases that go to panel, the most appropriate penalty from a list of indicative options, which scale according to the level of misconduct, will be given.

See our Academic Misconduct Policy for full penalty details.

Getting the outcome

If you attend the panel you will usually be told the outcome at the end of the discussion. Regardless of whether you attend, you’ll be sent an email within 10 working days confirming the decision.

Submit an appeal

If you think there has been an error in the process, you can appeal an academic misconduct decision.

Speak to the Students’ Union

The Students’ Union offers a free support and advocacy service. Get in touch if you have been contacted about academic misconduct.

Advice and representation provided by a Student Voice Advocate is independent from the University, and is offered in strictest confidence.

You can call the Students’ Union on 01273 877038 or email advice@sussexstudent.com.

Staff

If you work for Sussex, you should refer to our academic misconduct regulations for staff.

See more from Reports concerning you
