
GenAI in Research
Resources
Gen AI Hub
GenAI in Research
GenAI technologies offer many potential benefits for research but they also present risks if implemented without due consideration to issues such as academic integrity, privacy and ethics.
This section aims to support you to:
identify ways in which GenAI can be used responsibly to enhance and support research;
define key guidelines underpinning responsible use of GenAI in research.
Using GenAI to enhance and support research processes
GenAI tools hold considerable potential for enhancing and supporting the research process. For example, GenAI tools can be used to:
support ideation;
explore/code/annotate topics and data;
structure or improving the quality of textual arguments;
generate (audio)visual representations of data.
However, these tools also have limitations which can pose 
risks
to
academic integrity
.
Responsible use of GenAI in Research
When deciding if, or how, you will use GenAI, it is useful to consider the following points adapted from the European Commission’s Living Guidelines on the Responsible Use of Generative AI in Research (2024):
Researchers remain ultimately 
responsible
 for scientific output.
Researchers should use GenAI 
transparently
, i.e. by 
citing usage
 in outputs.
Researchers should pay particular attention to issues related to 
privacy
, 
confidentiality 
and 
intellectual property rights
 when sharing sensitive or protected information with AI tools.
When using GenAI, researchers need to respect applicable 
national, EU and international legislation
, as in their regular research activities.
To maximise the benefits of GenAI tools, researchers should recognise that continuous learning may be needed and should consider undertaking training.
Researchers should refrain from using GenAI tools substantially in sensitive activities that could impact other researchers or organisations (for example peer review, evaluation of research proposals etc).
Research funder guidelines
When using GenAI to support the development of research proposals, 
adherence to research funder guidelines
 is critical. Details on current guidelines are available from the links below:
Wellcome Trust 
Funders joint statement: use of generative AI tools in funding applications and assessment.
European Commission 
Living guidelines on the responsible use of generative AI in research.
Science Foundation Ireland 
Research Integrity.

