Version: 2
Date of Issue: 4 June 2026
College Statement on Artificial Intelligence and Generative
AI in Teaching, Learning, Assessment & Research
This statement is a living document that will be regularly reviewed and updated as Artificial Intelligence
(AI) and Generative Artificial Intelligence (GenAI) technologies evolve, and as other related College
policies are published.
This Statement aims to:
▪      Guide staff and students: provide clear, consistent, robust guidance for the use of GenAI in
teaching, learning, assessment and research at Trinity;
▪      Define acceptable use: clarify what is permitted or prohibited in academic work;
▪      Uphold academic integrity: clarify expectations around acceptable, responsible, ethical use of
GenAI;
▪      Promote critical thinking; encourage staff and students to use GenAI in a way which supports
and enhances the learning process;
Support sustainable innovation in teaching, learning, assessment and research.
Who is this statement for:
▪      Students: undergraduate and graduate across all disciplines.
▪      Academic teaching staff.
▪      All staff involved in teaching and/or supporting teaching and learning.
▪      Researchers
1
1
                                                                                                                                              Version: 2
Date of Issue: 4 June 2026
Table of Contents
Definitions................................................................................................................................................. 2
Context ..................................................................................................................................................... 3
AI and GenAI in Trinity .............................................................................................................................. 3
Principles and values underpinning use of AI and GenAI in Trinity ........................................................... 4
Access to Generative AI Technologies at Trinity ....................................................................................... 4
General guidance for Trinity Staff and Students ....................................................................................... 5
Additional Guidance for Teaching Academics and Staff involved in supporting teaching and learning .... 8
Additional Guidance for Students ............................................................................................................. 8
Guidance for Researchers ......................................................................................................................... 8
Guidance for Professional Services Staff ................................................................................................... 9
Related policies and resources.................................................................................................................. 9
References .............................................................................................................................................. 10
Definitions
Artificial Intelligence (AI)
Artificial intelligence is generally understood to be a set of technologies that enable computers to
perform a variety of functions usually perceived as requiring human intelligence – for example,
understanding speech, recognising objects in images, composing written answers and problem
reasoning. A more formal definition of an AI system from the European Union AI Act (2024) is:
…a machine-based system designed to operate with varying levels of autonomy and that may
exhibit adaptiveness after deployment and that, for explicit or implicit objectives, infers, from
the input it receives, how to generate outputs such as predictions, content, recommendations,
or decisions that can influence physical or virtual environments (EU AI Act 2024).
Generative Artificial Intelligence (GenAI)
Generative AI is the sub-area of AI, involving AI systems which generate content — for example,
human dialogue, speech, images and video. GenAI systems are capable of generating such content
based on a user’s request or instruction. More formally, GenAI is defined by UNESCO as “an artificial
intelligence (AI) technology that automatically generates content in response to prompts written in
natural-language conversational interfaces” (UNESCO 2023).
2
2
                                                                                                  Version: 2
Date of Issue: 4 June 2026
Context
This Statement aligns with national and international regulations and guidance on responsible and
ethical AI and GenAI adoption. It reflects the principles set out by the Higher Education Authority
(HEA), the Irish Government’s Guidelines on Artificial Intelligence for the Public Sector, and the OECD
Digital Education Outlook 2026, which offer formal recommendations on the governance and
application of AI and GenAI, and support the development of trustworthy, human‑centred AI practices
across education systems.
AI and GenAI in Trinity
As Ireland’s leading university and as a world leader in AI research, Trinity recognises that AI and GenAI
offer new opportunities for teaching, learning, assessment and research. We also recognise that these
technologies present significant and increasing challenges and risks, including to academic integrity,
ethics, privacy, impartiality, intellectual property and sustainability.
Acknowledging these opportunities and challenges, Trinity commits to supporting students and staff to
become AI literate and fluent, thereby equipping them with skills and knowledge to navigate and
respond to the challenges and risks of AI and GenAI, harness their potential for enhancing teaching,
learning, assessment and research – and to be prepared for future challenges as these technologies
evolve. Trinity also commits to providing ongoing guidance and resources to support students and staff
to use AI and GenAI in ways that are appropriate, responsible and ethical – and to ensure that
academic integrity is maintained in usage of these technologies.
In addition to the resources and supports that Trinity provides and recognising that appropriate uses of
AI and GenAI tools vary across academic disciplines, Schools will have flexibility to customise their own
discipline-specific practices in line with this institutional statement, other institutional policies as they
develop, and national and international regulation. Trinity’s goal is to enable overall consistency in the
regulation of GenAI usage, while also respecting where disciplines or degree programmes require
specific restrictions in GenAI usage in assessment preparation and execution. Thus, where disciplines
or degree programmes wish to refine specific regulations on student use of GenAI for learning, general
as well as programme-specific regulations should be communicated in the relevant discipline/degree
programme handbook.
Such regulation could range from how student GenAI usage is acknowledged or cited within student
assessment submissions, to prohibition of GenAI usage in the production of student assessment
submissions.
3
3
                                                                                                Version: 2
Date of Issue: 4 June 2026
Principles and values underpinning use of AI and GenAI in Trinity
The principles underpinning the use of AI and GenAI in Trinity align as appropriate with the College’s
Statement on Integrity (2022), the European Commission’s Living Guidelines on the Responsible Use of
Generative AI in Research (2025), and also reflect the values of taking responsibility for our actions and
being innovative towards a sustainable future, mentioned in the Trinity’s Strategic Plan 2025-2030.
Transparency and Honesty
We will strive to be transparent and honest in our use of AI and GenAI, and to give clear, fair, impartial
and appropriate acknowledgement and citation to any role that AI and GenAI have played in
scholarship, teaching, learning, assessment and research.
Responsibility and Accountability
We will take very seriously our own responsibility and accountability for our use of AI and GenAI, and
for the output we create via that use. Acknowledging the importance and necessity of human
oversight, we will abide by College policies and other relevant policies and legislation in our use of AI
and GenAI in scholarship, teaching, learning, assessment and research.
Respect
We will demonstrate respect for colleagues, students, research participants, subjects, the environment
and cultural heritage in our use of AI and GenAI. We will strive to demonstrate respect for intellectual
property, personal and sensitive data, and confidential information in its use.
Innovation
We will strive to harness the potential of AI and GenAI for enhancing or transforming teaching,
learning, assessment and research, recognising that creativity and innovation must be balanced by
responsibility, integrity, respect, transparency and sustainability at all times.
Access to GenAI Technologies at Trinity
All Trinity staff and students can access Microsoft Copilot Chat through their institutional Microsoft
365 account as part of Trinity’s Microsoft suite. When users sign in with their Trinity credentials,
Copilot Chat applies Microsoft's enterprise data protection controls, indicated by a green shield on
screen. This means that all prompts and responses stay within the Microsoft 365 service boundary, are
encrypted, are not stored and are not used to train underlying models. This also ensures that the
service is covered under Trinity's agreed terms with Microsoft, including data protection and
data‑processing arrangements.
4
4
                                                                                                 Version: 2
Date of Issue: 4 June 2026
General guidance for Trinity Staff and Students
In response to the risks, threats, and potential misuse of GenAI and AI in general and in educational
contexts, the European Commission, the OECD, the Irish Government, and the Higher Education
Authority (HEA) have developed laws, regulations, and guidelines to safeguard human oversight and
ensure the safe, ethical, and reliable development and deployment of AI technologies. In alignment
with these regulations and legal imperatives, Trinity will support teaching, learning, assessment, and
research practices that are in full compliance with these requirements.
How do I use GenAI?
There are many GenAI tools available online (e.g. ChatGPT, Microsoft Copilot etc.) which are accessed
via a query/conversational interface. These tools typically ask for a ‘prompt’ (in the form of a question
or instruction) typed into a text space. To start using GenAI is, therefore, very easy. If you can phrase a
query or a question, you can use GenAI.
GenAI tools can generate very eloquent, convincing text and images. However, GenAI tools do not store
facts and knowledge, rather they generate outputs based on probabilities. Thus, GenAI is prone to
making factual errors (called hallucinations) which are, nonetheless, very convincingly presented. This is
where academic/professional judgement and domain expertise are very important. If you are using
GenAI, you need to double-check the information it is giving you as it may present information which is
simply not true! Therefore, it is crucial for any user to fact-check any output from a GenAI tool.
GenAI has proven to be a very effective tool for exploring information, suggesting activities or plans
appropriate to a problem or task, or generating ideas or materials through interactive dialogue.
How do I cite usage of GenAI?
Where the output of GenAI is used in a document or work output, this usage should be acknowledged
and appropriately cited. A citation should typically include the date of generation, the tool used and
the prompts used to create the output, with verbatim quotations enclosed in quotation marks.
School/Degree programme handbooks and/ or relevant sections of the module VLE (i.e. Blackboard
Ultra) should provide rules for such citation. The format of the citation is dependent on the type of
work output or document for which it is being included. Where GenAI content is used verbatim (e.g. in
the form of unedited text or image), this should be accompanied by a full citation, with text-based
content included in quotation marks. For further guidelines on this, see Guide to acknowledging the
use of generative AI and referencing generative AI (developed by the Library of Trinity College Dublin).
Note any long verbatim quotation (e.g. more than one paragraph), even with citation, may be
considered inappropriate or poor practice in student assessment documents and publications.
5
5
                                                                                             Version: 2
Date of Issue: 4 June 2026
How can I use GenAI in my research?
Knowledge and understanding of how GenAI tools can be used for research is developing rapidly. Many
of the issues and responsibilities covered in previous answers are highly relevant regarding lawful,
ethical and sustainable use of GenAI in research. The accuracy of AI-generated content needs also to
be carefully considered and biases mitigated. Citation of results from GenAI usage in published papers
(conference and journal) are determined by the publisher/event organisers/professional body and
adherence to their guidance needs to be maintained.
Regarding how GenAI use can be embedded into the research process and activities, many possible
approaches are being explored e.g. using GenAI to correlate papers in literature reviews, using GenAI
to generate possible approaches to a problem or task, using GenAI to iterate through and exhaustively
evaluate possible solutions/approaches etc. Usage of such tools should be consistent with Trinity’s
Policy on Good Research Practice.
What advice should I give to students on their use of GenAI?
GenAI will be used by students. Given the ubiquity of GenAI tools within everyday devices and
platforms, it is impossible to ban their use. Students and staff are advised that GenAI can generate
erroneous, biased content. Therefore, students and staff are expected to fact-check information
generated by GenAI, and to seek out primary sources of information (e.g. reputable books,
publications, papers etc.) as part of a rigorous academic practice. Further advice is available on the
Centre for Academic Practice’s GenAI Hub and the National Academic Integrity Network’s Generative
AI Guidelines for Educators (July 2023).
From an academic integrity perspective, if a student generates content from a GenAI tool and submits
it as his/her/their own work, it is considered plagiarism, which is defined as academic misconduct in
accordance with College Academic Integrity Policy. If a sentence or quotation from GenAI content is
used by a student in their academic work, it must be referenced. Cases of plagiarism are considered
under College Academic Misconduct Procedures and College’s Academic Integrity Policy. A complete
guide to Academic Integrity policies and procedures is available on Academic Affairs’ Academic
Integrity Policy and Related Procedures page. Many research funders and publishers now have policies
in relation to the use or misuse of GenAI in writing and review for publications, funding proposals and
other academic outputs. Researchers are advised to check any restrictions set by funders and
publishers on the use of GenAI and use the correct declaration page in their research dissertations (see
point 91 of the submission Guidelines for Theses and Dissertations)
What should I not do with GenAI?
It is important to understand that some usages of GenAI are unlawful and must therefore be avoided.
6
6
                                                                                             Version: 2
Date of Issue: 4 June 2026
Many GenAI tools are trained on vast amounts of data gleaned from a wide variety of sources.
However, the training of such tools is not transparent and the exact extent of their training data and
sources remains unknown. Some tools that have been trained on material on the open web are likely
to have ingested protected personal data, copyright-protected content, copyright-infringing content,
misinformation, disinformation, hate speech, defamation, and all manner of other unlawful content.
Such models are then likely to produce unlawful material in their outputs. However, even GenAI tools
trained on curated data to avoid such illegal inputs can still be used in unlawful ways and can still
produce unlawful outputs. It is necessary to be aware of these problems when using such tools.
For example, since most GenAI tools harvest inputs and use interactions with users for their systems
development, you must ensure that their inputs, prompts, queries, instructions, contextual
information, and other interactions are lawful. So, just as you are not allowed to share personal,
private or sensitive information about colleagues/students on websites or via other electronic means,
you are NOT allowed to use such information as part of inputs, prompts, queries, instructions and
other interactions when using GenAI tools. In most cases, to do so is unlawful as you are sharing
private information with a third party (the GenAI provider). Even where sharing such private
information is not necessarily unlawful, it is against College regulations. Hence, student work
(submitted assessments and contributions) are considered private information, and are NOT allowed
to be uploaded into a third-party GenAI tool for any reason.
Similarly, content which is confidential in Trinity or confidential to your teaching or administrative
work, or for which you do not own the copyright, or which is not publicly available, should NOT be used
in creating inputs, prompts, queries, instructions, contextual information, and other interactions for
GenAI. Again, in most cases, to do so is unlawful. Even where sharing such information is not
necessarily unlawful, it is against College regulations. Hence, confidential College information is NOT
allowed to be uploaded into a third-party GenAI tool for any reason.
What are the key concerns with using GenAI?
As well as the legal liability concerns mentioned above, there are several other concerns of which users
of GenAI need to be aware. Because GenAI is trained on such a wide pool of data, content generated
by a GenAI tool can contain factual errors and exhibit bias (which can come from bias already
embedded in its training data).
The training and use of GenAI systems can also use significant amounts of energy and resources,
leading to sustainability concerns. This energy consumption should be considered in relation to College
Sustainability policies and practices. Additionally, some GenAI tools harvest information from user
prompts, including contextual information from users’ interaction with GenAI tools, leading to privacy
and intellectual property concerns. GenAI tools vary in regard to the extent of these concerns.
7
7
                                                                                             Version: 2
Date of Issue: 4 June 2026
Additional Guidance for Teaching Academics and Staff involved in
supporting teaching and learning
Trinity’s Centre for Academic Practice has developed a GenAI in Teaching, Learning, Assessment &
Research Hub. Containing a wealth of resources for teaching staff and those who support teaching and
learning, this Hub aim aims to:
•   explain how GenAI works, including its capabilities and limitations;
•   illustrate how GenAI can be used in teaching, learning, assessment and research;
•   give insight into how GenAI is currently used to enhance teaching, learning, assessment and
research at Trinity;
•   identify risks and challenges to be considered when using GenAI.
Note, the GenAI Hub is a ‘living’ site, regularly reviewed and updated in alignment with AI and GenAI
evolution, national and international regulations and guidelines. Academics and staff are encouraged
to visit the site regularly over the Academic Year.
Further Links for Educators:
Generative AI: Guidelines for Educators (National Academic Integrity Network) July 2023
Generative AI in Higher Education Teaching & Learning: Principles for Ethical AI Adoption, 2025.
Additional Guidance for Students
Students need clear guidance on how to use GenAI in their learning, assessment and research. These
guidelines are essential to maintain academic integrity, human oversight, and critical thinking in any
output. Students should be guided to an ethical, responsible, and diligent human-AI collaboration. In
any AI and GenAI uses for their academic work, students must acknowledge and reference their uses
following the guidelines below.
Guide to acknowledging the use of generative AI and referencing generative AI (developed by the
Library of Trinity College Dublin).
Student Learning Development resources
Guidance for Researchers
It is generally recognised that GenAI holds significant potential for supporting and accelerating
scientific discovery, increasing productivity, and enhancing research processes. However, it also
introduces significant risks that could undermine research practices and compromise the integrity of
research outputs.
8
8
                                                                                               Version: 2
Date of Issue: 4 June 2026
For confidential research data, the use of private GenAI tools (where there is no data sharing or data
retention either directly or through training of models) may be permissible where this is covered by
the consent given by participants, and the ethical approval for the research, and is in-line with the
requirements of relevant legislation and regulations.
Gen AI tools should only be used in a postgraduate research context following consultation with the
thesis supervisor(s) and with their approval. In some disciplinary areas, some uses of Gen AI tools may
not be considered appropriate.
To prevent unintentional or deliberate misuse of GenAI in research, Trinity’s researchers should adhere
to the relevant policies, guidelines, and legislation below:
Trinity Policy on Good Research Practice
European Commission (2025) Living Guidelines on the responsible use of GenAI in Research.
EU Artificial Intelligence Act and associated Guidelines.
Trinity Data Protection Policy (including EU-General Data Protection Regulations)
Science Foundation Ireland Research Integrity Policy and Guidelines Research Integrity Policy
Wellcome statement on use of generative AI tools in funding applications and assessment
Guidance for Professional Services Staff
Guidance for professional staff will be made available in the coming months.
Related Policies and Resources
Please note, the policies below are those which may be relevant to GenAI. The use of GenAI for
research purposes in the preparation of grants or publications will be subject to regulations specific to
the funding agency or journal publisher respectively. None of the Trinity policies listed below currently
specifically focus on generative AI. IT policies are also likely to be relevant.
Sector:
•      National Academic Integrity Network’s Generative AI Guidelines for Educators (July 2023)
•      European Commission Living Guidelines on the Responsible Use of Generative AI in Research (2025)
•      HEA Generative AI in Higher Education Teaching & Learning: Policy Framework. (2025)
•      Irish Government Guidelines for the Responsible Use of AI in the Public Service. (2025)
•      Draft IUA High Level Principles for Postgraduate Researchers on the Use of Generative AI in
Research (Working document 2026)
Trinity College:
9
9
                                                                                             Version: 2
Date of Issue: 4 June 2026
▪      Policy, Practice and Regulations on Intellectual Property
▪      Data Protection Policy
▪      Academic Integrity Policy and Related Procedures
▪      Policy on Good Research Practice
▪      Equality Policy
▪      Generative AI in Teaching, Learning, Assessment & Research hub
▪      Guide to acknowledging the use of generative AI and referencing generative AI
▪      Research Policies
▪      College Academic Misconduct Procedures
▪      Academic Integrity Policy
▪      Guidelines for Thesis and Dissertations
References
European Commission (2024) Artificial Intelligence Act.
European Commission (2025) Living Guidelines on the Responsible Use of Generative AI in Research.
HEA (2025) Generative AI in Higher Education Teaching & Learning: Policy Framework.
Irish Government (2025) Guidelines for the Responsible Use of AI in the Public Service.
National Academic Integrity Network (2023) Generative Artificial Intelligence: Guidelines for Educators.
MIT. (2025) Explained: Generative AI’s Environmental Impact.
OECD (2026) Digital Education Outlook: Exploring effective uses of GenAI in Education.
Trinity College Dublin (2022) Statement on Integrity.
Trinity Strategic Plan THRIVE (2025-2030).
Trinity College Dublin. Library. Guide to acknowledging the use of generative AI and referencing
generative AI.
Trinity College Dublin. Research Policies.
Trinity College Dublin. GenAI in Teaching, Learning, Assessment and Research Hub.
Trinity College Dublin. College Academic Misconduct Procedures.
Trinity College Dublin. Academic Integrity Policy.
Trinity College Dublin. Guidelines for Thesis and Dissertations.
Trinity College Dublin. Student Learning Development.
UNESCO (2023) Guidance for Generative AI in Education and Research.
10
10
