      
Welcome - Generative Artificial Intelligence (GenAI) - Library Guides at Ulster University
Skip to Main Content
        The Library
Ulster University Library
Library Guides
Generative Artificial Intelligence (GenAI)
Welcome
                Search this Guide
                Search
Generative Artificial Intelligence (GenAI): Welcome
Generative Artificial Intelligence (AI) Guide
Welcome
What is Generative AI?
Types of AI Tools
AI Features in Library Databases
AI Literacy
Prompt engineering
Copyright
Ethical concerns
Sustainability concerns
Ulster AI Resources
Referencing AI
                                            Guidance on use of Generative AI for students
The university has 
guidance
 on how to use Generative AI responsibly. Read this guidance to know more about what you are expected to comply with as an Ulster student. This guidance includes the following:
Should I use Generative AI?
Limitations
Using Generative AI reasonably
Data security
Acknowledging the use of Generative AI tools
Also, read about our university's 
Academic Misconduct Policy
 here which states the use of AI - 
Student Academic Misconduct Procedure
Check out other 
Ulster AI Resources
 in this guide.
                                            Uses of  Generative AI in academic work
Welcome to the Library Subject Guide for Generative Artificial Intelligence
If you have any questions, queries or need help using GenAI please 
Contact Us
The content on this guide in using AI is in line with the 
University's guidelines
.
Please check with your course instructor about the use of Generative AI in accordance with each module specifications.
Quick tips:
Use GenAI to support your learning, not replace your own thinking.
Do not copy and paste GenAI-generated content into assignments.
Review, edit and personalise outputs in your own words.
Always acknowledge and reference any tools you use, following university guidance.
Keep a screenshot of conversations or outputs in your appendix where required.
Check all GenAI-generated information against reliable academic sources.
Cite all sources correctly to avoid plagiarism.
Be careful when uploading personal, confidential or copyrighted material.
Remember:
 GenAI can be a useful study tool, but you are the author and responsible for the accuracy, originality and integrity of your work.
                                            Training & Workshops
Next:
 What is Generative AI? >>
Last Updated:
Aug 26, 2026 4:13 PM
URL:
https://guides.library.ulster.ac.uk/artificialintelligence
 Print Page
Login to LibApps
    