Skip to Main Content

Artificial Intelligence: Citing AI Content

A basic guide to AI.

-

Introduction to AI

-

Glossary of Terms

-

Bias & Privacy Issues

-

Environmental Concerns & Transparency

-

Citing AI Content

- Acknowledging AI Tools
- Note About AI and Citation Styles
- APA Guidelines for Citing AI Generated Content
- MLA Guidelines for Citing AI Generated Content

-

Library Resources

Acknowledging AI Tools

If you use an AI tool or technology in order to generate information which you paraphrase or quote in your writing, you must cite and reference this work just like any other source.

Failing to acknowledge the use of AI to complete an assignment can violate academic integrity standards in several ways :

- Misrepresentation of original work: Not acknowledging work created by AI or with AI assistance is the same as presenting someone else's work as your own.

- Lack of transparency: Academic honesty requires transparency. Without transparency, the extent of your learning, knowledge, and efforts is unclear as is the source of the work you submit.

- Violation of Academic Integrity Code: See UIS Academic Integrity policy.

- Violation of Intellectual Property Rights: AI depends on Large Language Models that devour immense amounts of information from the internet including much protected by copyright. AI generated content could contain output that violates copyright or other intellectual property rights.

Note About AI and Citation Styles

The citation styles for AI generated content are constantly evolving and subject to change. Consult directly with the APA and MLA websites or ask a librarian for assistance.

APA Guidelines for Citing AI Generated Content

Guidelines

- APA reference format: OpenAI. (Year). ChatGPT (Month Day version) [Large language model]. https://chat.openai.com

- APA in-text citation: (OpenAI, Year)

Example 1 (APA)

When prompted with “Is the left brain right brain divide real or a metaphor?” the ChatGPT-generated text indicated that although the two brain hemispheres are somewhat specialized, “the notation that people can be characterized as ‘left-brained’ or ‘right-brained’ is considered to be an oversimplification and a popular myth” (OpenAI, 2023).

Citation

OpenAI. (2023). ChatGPT (Mar 14 version) [Large language model]. https://chat.openai.com/chat

Example 2 (APA)

When given a follow-up prompt of “What is a more accurate representation?” the ChatGPT-generated text indicated that “different brain regions work together to support various cognitive processes” and “the functional specialization of different regions can change in response to experience and environmental factors” (OpenAI, 2023; see Appendix A for the full transcript).

Citation

OpenAI. (2023). ChatGPT (Mar 14 version) [Large language model]. https://chat.openai.com/chat

Guidelines and examples are taken directly from the APA style blog.

MLA Guidelines for Citing AI Generated Content

MLA continues to rely on its Template of Core Elements when creating a citation for AI generated content. MLA's approach is intended to allow writers flexibility when creating citations for emerging information sources.

Guidlines

- MLA In-Text format: Describe what was generated by the AI tool. This may involve including information about the prompt in the Title of Source element if you have not done so in the text.

- MLA Works-Cited-List format: “Text of prompt” prompt. ChatGPT, Day Month version, OpenAI, Day Month Year, chat.openai.com.

Example(MLA):

Prompt: Describe the symbolism of the green light in the book The Great Gatsby by F. Scott Fitzgerald.

In-text citation of paraphrased AI-generated response: While the green light in The Great Gatsby might be said to chiefly symbolize four main things: optimism, the unattainability of the American dream, greed, and covetousness (“Describe the symbolism”), arguably the most important—the one that ties all four themes together—is greed.

Works-Cited-List Entry:

“Describe the symbolism of the green light in the book The Great Gatsby by F. Scott Fitzgerald” prompt. ChatGPT, 13 Feb. version, OpenAI, 8 Mar. 2023, chat.openai.com/chat.

Guidelines and examples are adapted from: https://style.mla.org/citing-generative-ai/.

-
Last Updated: Aug 20, 2026 2:29 PM

-
URL: https://libguides.uis.edu/ai

-
Print Page

Login to LibApps

Report a problem

Subjects:

- Computer Science

Tags:

- AI
