Breadcrumbs List.

Show Truncated Breadcrumbs.

-
Home

-
Ngā tauira | Students

-
Forms, policies and guidelines

-
Student policies and guidelines

-
Academic integrity and copyright

-

You are currently on: Advice for students on using Artificial Intelligence

Advice for students on using Artificial Intelligence

Artificial Intelligence in Learning and Teaching

“We will adopt and embrace Artificial Intelligence confidently and ethically in ways that maximise value and benefit for our people, our institution, and our world.” (University Executive Committee, October 2024)

The University is committed to ensuring that its graduates are well prepared for their future, are responsible users of AI, and have the familiarity and capabilities to thrive in an era of AI. The University seeks to:

- Improve student AI literacy
- Provide access to a dynamic set of AI skills
- Provide resources and learning experiences to support students to develop their own awareness and skills in the use of AI.

Artificial Intelligence literacy

The University’s Library and Learning Services have developed an online, self-guided resource on Canvas to guide students on using AI effectively, safely and responsibly: AI Essentials.

Artificial Intelligence in assessment

The university takes the position that AI has no agency. What this means is that the student who is prompting the AI tool is to be treated as the author. As the author, each student is responsible for the work generated by the AI tool, and this may include expressly acknowledging the use of the tool. Students must be aware of the limitations of AI and treat the output critically. Ultimately, students are responsible for the work that is submitted for assessment.

Two-lane approach to assessment

The University is adopting a two-lane approach to assessment to provide clarity to students on when and how they may use AI tools in taught courses. The two lanes work in tandem to ensure that assessments:

- Authentically assess students’ core knowledge and skills.
- Encourage the critical and responsible use of AI.
- Adapt to evolving AI capabilities and are inclusive, transparent and accessible.

The two-lane approach differentiates between controlled assessments where AI use is restricted, and other assessments where AI may be used.

Lane 1: Controlled assessment
Lane 2: Uncontrolled assessment

Definition

Graded assessment undertaken in controlled conditions and AI is restricted, by default.

Certain AI tools may be permitted in some courses but only where explicitly stated.

Graded or ungraded assessment undertaken in uncontrolled conditions.

Students may use AI to assist them, and this use is not restricted.

Rationale
Provides assurance about the authenticity of students’ work, maintains the integrity of degrees, and supports student progression.
Provides opportunities to build students’ confidence as discerning AI users.

Examples – for illustrative purposes only

Interactive oral assessments

Performance and/or practical work

Invigilated tests and examinations – online, in-person, and/or paper-based

Essays, reports and portfolios

Case study analyses

Practical simulations and creative artefacts

Presentations and posters

Academic

integrity
Students are not permitted to use AI tools in Lane 1 assessments.
Students are responsible for the work they submit for assessment, but are not restricted on the use of AI.

Courses using the two-lane approach

From 2027, all courses will explicitly identify which assessments are ‘Lane 1’ and which are ‘Lane 2’. Many courses will start to use these terms in 2026. Students should refer to their Course Director/Course Coordinator for guidance.

Learning about academic integrity

Academic integrity is an integral part of a university education. It involves showing respect to other's ideas, words, images, code, and may include express acknowledgement of who and what has influenced your thinking or the work you have produced. Academic integrity means being honest, careful, ethical and responsible in your academic work.

All new students commencing a programme at the University of Auckland are required to complete the online Academic Integrity course, ACADINT A01. This course is designed to increase your understanding of:

- Academic integrity
- University rules regarding academic conduct
- How we manage academic misconduct.

The course includes a module on Artificial Intelligence.

For more information

Course and programme-specific questions

If you have questions about using AI in your courses, please ask your Course Director, tutor and/or programme adviser.

Support for developing your study skills

A range of support and resources for developing your study skills are provided for all students by the University’s Library and Learning Services.

About academic integrity

General advice about how the University promotes academic integrity and how it responds to breaches such as academic misconduct.

Related links

-
About academic integrity

-
Academic Integrity Course

-
Academic integrity in online assessment
