- Home

-
How to...

-
Generative AI

GenAI for undergraduate students

GenAI for undergraduate students
Dos
Principles applied
Further resources

As an undergraduate student, your instructors may permit the use of GenAI tools in particular courses. It is important to respect the scope of permissible use, course expectations and academic integrity, foster authentic relationships in your courses and keep your learning at the center of the process. As you do so, you are encouraged to critically evaluate GenAI outputs, follow course-speciﬁc guidelines and contribute to your learning community through sharing your own thinking, perspectives and insights.

Dos

As an undergraduate student:

- consult with your instructor before using GenAI for course work

- read the course guidelines or other official instructions in the syllabus and Brightspace to see what is permitted

- make sure you understand the expectations for each course and assignment, including the role of GenAI and any required disclosure (when in doubt, you should consult with your instructor to avoid the potential for academic integrity violation)

- consider recommendations to use university-approved GenAI tools

- use GenAI in ways that support your learning without replacing your critical thinking

- take responsibility for the work you submit by evaluating GenAI outputs, citing sources properly and following academic integrity policies

A note on plagiarism tools

UVic has chosen not to use plagiarism detection tools due to concerns about how they collect and store student information and intellectual property. We prioritize protecting student privacy and educating students on how to maintain academic integrity while using educational tools.

Instructors may not use GenAI tools to grade students' work or to determine whether a student has violated UVic's Academic Integrity Policy.

Principles applied

Respect

Respect yourself and others by using GenAI in ways that support your learning, strengthen your learning relationships and honour diverse perspectives with proper attribution to original knowledge keepers and consider environmental impacts.

Relationships

Nurture relationships by using GenAI openly and collaboratively, choosing approaches that strengthen trust with peers and instructors rather than hiding or replacing shared learning.

Relevancy

If instructor permission is granted, keep GenAI use relevant by checking that outputs align with your discipline, local context and lived experience instead of accepting generic, decontextualized answers.

Responsibility

Take responsibility by following course GenAI rules, verifying AI outputs and owning the integrity and accuracy of every assignment you submit.

Reciprocity

Practice reciprocity by sharing what you learn about GenAI with peers, giving proper attribution and contributing insights that strengthen collective understanding.

Further resources

- use of GenAI tools in the classroom

- how to use ChatGPT responsibly

- UVic Libraries Acknowledgement statement
