Artificial Intelligence | University of Zurich | UZH

Artificial Intelligence

AI-generated image of UZH, generated in Deep Dream Generator based on a photograph of the main building.

Seven Guiding Principles on the Use of Artificial Intelligence in Research and Teaching at UZH

Artificial intelligence (AI) tools are shaping and changing the way people conduct research and teach. Considering the risks and opportunities, the Extended Executive Board of the University adopted the following guiding principles governing the use of this cutting-edge technology on 26 September 2023, which have since been expanded and supplemented.

UZH will support its members to become AI-literate and to develop basic skills on the use of generative AI tools in research and teaching that is in line with critical and good scientific practice.

UZH supports its instructors in conveying a considered approach to using AI and enabling students and PhD candidates to experience the opportunities and possibilities as well as the risks and limitations of the tools relevant to their field.

UZH encourages the development of teaching and learning formats, assessments and forms of individual feedback that are based on an academically sound and ethical use of AI.

a) The faculties ensure equal opportunities and fair conditions when carrying out assessments regardless of whether the use of AI tools as aids is permitted or prohibited.

	b) UZH promotes measures to ensure that student performances are assessed comprehensively, e.g. by including oral examination and assessment formats in addition to written work.

UZH members are transparent about their use of AI tools. The sole responsibility for content and products generated with the help of AI lies with the relevant users.

UZH members use AI tools in accordance with the statutory provisions (in particular, data protection and copyright law).

UZH will uphold academic integrity in all its activities and penalise violations of its Disciplinary Regulations and/or its Integrity Ordinance.

Recommendations on the Use of Generative AI

The following subsites contain recommendations and didactic resources on the use of generative AI at UZH:
Recommendations on the use of generative AI at UZH
Background information on generative AI

Didactic Resources

Helpful didactic resources on generative AI can be found on the UZH Teaching Tools website:
Teaching Tools: Didactic Resources on generative AI at UZH

Events

UZH hosts many different talks, panel discussions and other events on the topic of artificial intelligence.
AI at UZH: Events

Additional Information

Documents and Regulations

Disziplinarverordnung der UZH

Verordnung über den Umgang mit wissenschaftlichem Fehlverhalten an der Universität Zürich (Integritätsverordnung)

Kodex zur wissenschaftlichen Integrität der Akademien der Wissenschaften Schweiz

Contact

University of Zurich

Educational Development

Dr. Thomas Hidber

thomas.hidber@uzh.ch

Background Information

Recommendations

Events

