Student Hub

History Student Hub

Welcome to the History Student Hub. The pages in this Hub have been designed to provide all the information you need about studying in the History Department. The Hub explains what will be expected of you, and what you can expect from the department, so you are encouraged to read through everything carefully.

We look forward to seeing you at lectures and seminars this year and we encourage you to attend the workshops, talks, and social events that make the department such a vibrant and stimulating place.

Welcome and Induction

Welcome to Warwick! Here is all the information you need to get started.

Undergraduate StudentsPostgraduate Taught StudentsPostgraduate Research StudentsVisiting Students

Department Information

Where, when, and how to get in touch with the department. If you have any questions, contact us.

Key Contacts People in the Department Our Location Communication Key Dates

Our Community and Values

We are committed to creating a diverse, equitable, and inclusive environment, and there are lots of ways that you can get involved in our departmental community.

Values and Expectations Undergraduate Community Postgraduate Community

Wellbeing and Support

You don't have to struggle through your studies. Here is information about support options and resources, as well as about reasonable adjustments and

how we make our learning environments inclusive for all.

Wellbeing Support Disability Support

Student Voice

History actively works with students to improve the department for all. Find out how to share your feedback on how we're doing.

Student Voice

Learning Resources

Warwick has lots of resources to support your learning.

Library Modern Records Centre IT

Careers

Thinking about your next steps? The Careers team are here to support you with tailored guidance for History students.

Careers and Employability Intercalated Year

Undergraduate
Students

Course Information

Everything you need to know about your course, including learning outcomes, syllabi, progression, and modules.

Course Information Modules Attendance

Assessment

Guidance and resources to help you navigate your assessments with confidence, from preparation, to submission, to marks and feedback.

Assessment

Skills Development

Guidance and resources to help you develop your academic skills and succeed in your degree.

Skills Development

International Opportunities

Undergraduate students in History have opportunities to study abroad, either during an intercalated year, on our Venice programme, or on one of our Venice Short Courses.

International Opportunities Venice Programme Intercalated Year

Postgraduate Taught (MA) Students

Course Information

Everything you need to know about your course, including learning outcomes, syllabi, progression, and modules.

Course Information Modules Attendance

Assessment

Guidance and resources to help you navigate your assessments (including your Dissertation) with confidence, from preparation, to submission, to marks and feedback.

Assessment

Skills Development

Guidance and resources to help you develop your academic skills and succeed in your degree.

Skills Development

Research Degree
Students

Course Information

As a research student, your closest contact will be with your supervisor, or supervisors, who will meet with you regularly to discuss your work, and agree on a programme of reading, research and writing with you.

Course Information Supervision

Research Support and Development
There are a wide range of resources to support your research and your professional development.

Research Support

Teaching Opportunities

It is one of the key features of graduate training in History at Warwick that we provide opportunities for you to gain teaching experience on our undergraduate degrees.

Teaching Opportunities

ePortfolios

ePortfolios are a space that you can use to share your research interests, professional qualifications and academic outputs.

ePortfolios

Recent Updates

September 2026:

The History Student Hub is brand new for 2026, so it may look like a lot has changed! However, the information in it remains the same as in previous years, with the following exceptions, listed in alphabetical order:

- Academic Integrity: we have added information on the importance of keeping your notes, and the declaration that you make every time you submit work on Tabula. We have also created a new History-specific Academic Integrity Training, which all students are expected to complete, and a page to help you understand what happens if your work is suspected of academic misconduct and is reviewed by the Academic Conduct Panel.

- Attendance: the university has introduced card readers to help record attendance, so we have updated our departmental guidance.

- Marking Criteria: we have updated the undergraduate marking criteria for both written work and seminar contribution. What we are looking for in your work has not changed, but we hope that this updated criteria and additional guidance will help to make it clearer.

-
Skills Development: we have brought together various sources of information about how you can develop your skills into one central page.

- Values and Expectations: these have not changed, but we have provided more detailed information about our approach to inclusion, freedom of speech, and how we can ensure that all staff and students are treated with dignity and respect.

- Wrong File Submission: we have changed our policy on what happens if you submit the wrong file, as part of a Faculty of Arts review of assessment policies, to bring our policies in line with other departments in the faculty. This includes information about what counts as a "correct" file, and the importance of using university-provided software to complete your assignments.

Coming soon:

The Hub remains a work in progress, and there is more that we are planning to add. This includes:

- An A-Z or index to help you navigate the Hub

- A list of useful forms

- Clarification on the penalties for going over the word count for undergraduate and postgraduate taught students. This is part of an ongoing Faculty of Arts review of assessment policies.

- More detailed guidance on how to participate in seminars and succeed in seminar contribution assessments.

- A "glossary" to further help you understand our marking criteria.

The aim of the History Student Hub is to provide accurate and up to date information. If anything changes, we will list it on this page. The final arbiter of policy and procedure are the University Regulations.

If you have any questions about the Hub or its contents, or if you would like to make a suggestion, please see our section on Student Voice.

Student Handbook

This handbook contains important information about administrative and regulatory issues for both undergraduate and postgraduate students. It should be read in conjunction with the information on the Hub.

History Student Handbook

University Regulations

These pages will help you to navigate all of the university regulations relating to your studies.

Academic Manual (Directory of Academic Regulation and Policy)University CalendarRegulations Guidelines and Information Related to Student Life

Complaints

Complaints
