Warwick Law School
Policy on the use of Artificial Intelligence (AI)
(1) Our approach to Artificial Intelligence (AI)
Warwick Law School is committed to developing a holistic approach to AI in all aspects of our
education. We seek to develop AI literacy among our students to instil good practice regarding
the responsible use of AI as a tool to assist (but not replace) their learning and skills
development. This includes promoting awareness about the ethical use of AI as well as about
the concerns over the robustness and bias of many AI systems. We will monitor the use of AI
by students to ensure that this is done responsibly and ethically. This includes monitoring the
impact the use of AI has on development of essential academic skills by our students.
Academic integrity must be ensured in all activities involving the use of AI.
We are committed to understanding the implications of AI for our own subjects as well as the
ethical issues raised in all aspects of AI and to ensuring that what we teach includes
consideration of the legal and ethical challenges brought about by the use of AI.
(2) Artificial Intelligence (AI)
(a) AI Technologies
Artificial Intelligence is an umbrella term covering a wide range of algorithmic and data-driven
software systems. There are different types of algorithms (and combinations of different
approaches) with varying capabilities, either of a deterministic or adaptive machine-learning
type. AI performs a wide variety of tasks, not always clearly identified as “AI” in people’s minds
(e.g., spell-checkers, auto-complete, recommendations on shopping websites or streaming
services, etc).
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) defines an AI system
as “a machine-based system that, for explicit or implicit objectives, infers, from the input it
receives, how to generate outputs such as predictions, content, recommendations, or
decisions that can influence physical or virtual environments. Different AI systems vary in their
Adopted: Education Committee, 20 November 2024
Applicable from: immediately
levels of autonomy and adaptiveness after deployment”.1 All AI systems have in common that
they offer varying degrees of automation for particular tasks, often more efficiently and
quicker than humans.
A particular sub-category of AI is Generative AI Systems (“GenAI”). They can be useful for some
academic tasks but can also be misused in a way that violates our standards and expectations
as to academic integrity.
GenAI, such as ChatGPT or Claude, is based on deep-learning neutral networks utilising
“transformer” technology. They are trained on vast amounts of data and produces outputs
based on that data. The robustness and reliability of outputs can vary dramatically, and there
are many caveats to the use of generative AI systems.
(b) Limitations of GenAI
Importantly, AI does not process information in the way humans do. It does not develop
knowledge. It lacks common sense and the ability to locate information in a wider
context/experience. Its outputs are generally based on the data on which it was trained, and,
in the case of “self-learning” (adaptive) algorithms, data acquired during deployment; it
therefore lacks the ability to produce truly original and creative outputs. It does not have the
ability for critical thinking – one of the key academic skills we seek to instil and develop in our
students.
AI can be a very useful tool to help with certain tasks. It can uncover connections in data that
might not be apparent to humans (although it is at risk of overfitting, or “hallucinating”, such
connections) and can structure data better and faster than humans.
Recent advances in the performance and capability of certain AI systems, particularly
generative AI systems, have renewed interest in this technology, and have led to an explosion
in academic, policy and legislative work. A lot of unsubstantiated or exaggerated claims are
made about AI, and it is sometimes difficult to get a clear sense of what the technology is
capable of and what its limitations are. There are also concerns about the quality of the data
on which AI systems are trained, particularly regarding its robustness and accuracy, and biases.
Furthermore, the degree of energy use and the resulting environmental impact of the
infrastructure (e.g., data centres) required for some AI systems is starting to attract more
attention and concern.
1
Recommendation of the Council on Artificial Intelligence, version of 3 May 2024; available at
https://legalinstruments.oecd.org/en/instruments/OECD-LEGAL-0449
2
(3) AI in what we teach
The potential applications of AI technology in many fields will also raise questions for many of
the modules we teach. This is not just specific to obvious modules such as those on data
protection and profiling but will be relevant to many other modules. For instance, there are
issues in IP Law, contract law (algorithmic contracts), tort law (liability questions), criminal law,
employment/labour law, administrative law, and many others.
At Warwick Law School, we endeavour to progressively integrate the impact of AI into our
modules where relevant and to critically think about the implications of AI technology for
many areas of law, as well as the ethical implications of using AI.
Furthermore, we will explore how we can offer a general introduction to AI to all our students
to ensure that they have a baseline understanding of this technology, its capabilities and
limitations, and the risks associated with its use. The School will work with the Faculty
Education Committee and central University departments as required to ensure that there is
a consistent approach across the University.
(4) AI use in the classroom
When it comes to using AI tools in the classroom, we distinguish between unilateral use of
such tools by students (e.g., using ChatGPT to answer a question or translation software to
translate an answer from the student’s first language) and the deliberate use of AI in teaching
(e.g., a workshop focusing on the use of AI for a particular task and how to utilise an AI output
subsequently).
(a) AI use in teaching
Teaching may, on occasion, integrate the use of specific AI systems/tools, whether for skills
development or to test a specific application of AI. Here, the use of an AI system/tool will be
specified by the seminar tutor and/or in the seminar instructions. The way in which the AI
system/tool is to be used will be explained during the seminar. Students will work on specific
tasks under the guidance of their seminar tutor (e.g., the creation of a short answer to a
specific prompt which is then reviewed for accuracy and sense, or testing the outputs of an AI
system to a particular input/prompt).
(b) Unilateral use of AI tools by students during class
Some AI tools are integrated into software applications used by students all the time (such as
spellchecking, or database searches). These are mostly unproblematic (although see below
3
regarding permitted and prohibited uses). However, GenAI raises particular concerns and is
problematic. Unacceptable uses include students using a GenAI output and presenting this as
their own work in an (oral) response to a question. This is problematic pedagogically because
students will not engage in the thought processes they should be engaging in during seminars,
so their own learning experience is adversely affected. It can also be problematic from an
academic integrity perspective; for instance, reading out an AI-generated response to a
question suggests that this is the student’s own contribution when it is not.
Other AI tools are also problematic both for pedagogic and other reasons (including
compliance with University policies and legislation). This includes live transcription software
and live translation software.
The Law School does not allow the use of GenAI tools in the way described above. We also
do not allow the use of live translation software or live transcription software.
4
Information for Students:
You are not permitted to use generative AI tools such as ChatGPT during the class unless your
tutor expressly authorises this for a particular seminar or lecture task. It is important that you
use class discussions to develop your own understanding and knowledge of each topic. Your
contributions should be your own to provide you with the opportunity to test your knowledge
and understanding of the material, and to get feedback from your tutor.
You may use GenAI tools as part of your seminar preparation, provided that you do not use it
to generate answers to seminar questions.
You are not permitted to use live translation or live transcription software that translates the
seminar discussion or lecture as it happens. Using such software involves the recording or
capture of voices and transfer of voice data outside the University. This is not compatible with
University policies and may also contravene data protection laws.
If English is not your first language, you are allowed to use a translation tool that does not
involve voice recording or voice capture other than your own to help you formulate your
response during the seminar if you are unsure about the right wording. However, it is always
better just to try - you will learn from practice and gain more confidence.
More generally, you are not permitted to make any recordings of your seminars. Recording
seminar discussions is contrary to University policy. Where applicable, lecture elements will
be captured using the University's lecture recording system and will be made available
subsequently (please ask your tutor).
If you do not follow the above guidance, you might be asked to leave the class and to delete
any recordings you have made. You might also be referred for disciplinary action.
5
(5) AI use in assessment
AI tools can be used in a variety of ways in preparing an assessment. Some AI tools are
unproblematic (e.g., spell-checkers, databases etc). However, much greater care must be
taken with regard to GenAI tools, which generate text in response to specific prompts (such
as an essay question or similar). The use of GenAI systems in the context of all assessment
types can raise serious questions about academic integrity. However, whether the use of a
GenAI system in an individual case amounts to academic misconduct will depend on (i) how
the GenAI system is used; and (ii) whether any restrictions on GenAI systems are imposed as
part of the assessment instructions.
(a) “Designing out” GenAI use when setting assessment tasks
Whether the use of generative AI would produce an output that could score high marks can
depend on the way the assessment task is designed. In particular, tasks which prioritise
focused, critical discussion over knowledge reproduction are less suitable for preparation by
a GenAI system. Furthermore, requiring, as a learning outcome to be demonstrated by
students, the use of the essential and recommended reading from the module can further
limit the value to be gained from using AI. Also, a question with a precise task such as a
statement for discussion that takes a very strong position on matters covered on the module
will make the use of AI systems insufficient for obtaining good marks. These are all factors to
bear in mind when setting assessment tasks. Assessment tasks are reviewed during our vetting
process, which includes consideration of how “GenAI proof” an assessment task is.
(b) “Designing in” GenAI use for an assessment tasks
In some instances, the design of an assessment tasks might require or allow the use of AI. The
extent to which GenAI use is permitted for an assessment task will be stated clearly in the
assessment rubric (instructions).
AI could be used for assessment tasks in a variety of ways:
•
Students may be given an output by a generative AI system and will be asked to review
the output for accuracy and critique it more generally;
•
Students may be asked to use a generative AI system to create an output themselves
and critically review that output;
•
Students might be asked to use the same prompt to produce outputs from several
different generative AI systems and then critically review and compare these outputs.
6
The directed use of GenAI systems in an assessment task can have pedagogic value. It can be
useful in promoting AI literacy, and the considered and careful use of new technologies.
Equally, it should be balanced to ensure that students continue to appreciate the need for
their own academic rigour in developing reasoned responses to assessment tasks and the
need to demonstrate their own critical thinking abilities.
In setting an assessment task requiring the student’s use of an AI system, it is important to
bear in mind whether the AI system is made freely available only, or whether it is made
available in both free and paid-for versions. In the latter case, it needs to be considered
whether the paid-for version is accessible to all students without relying on their own
resources to ensure that all students have the same opportunity to tackle the assessment.
(6) Academic Integrity
With regard to academic integrity, our policy builds on the University’s Institutional Approach
to Artificial Intelligence and Academic Integrity. Any changes to the University’s Institutional
Approach, or any new University policies on the use of AI take precedence over this policy
whenever there is a conflict between them.
In accordance with both the University’s and the Law School’s academic integrity policy, the
Law School prohibits copying/paraphrasing either whole outputs or elements of outputs
generated by a GenAI system and submitted by students as their own work. Similarly, the
use of AI to complete certain parts of an assessment, such as analysis or evaluation, is not
permitted.
However, even where the use of GenAI systems is not prohibited, the Law School discourages
the use of such outputs even with correct and complete attribution. Assessments should be
used by students to demonstrate their knowledge of the subject (i.e., what has been taught,
including set readings) and their understanding and ability to utilise this in responding to
specific questions. The use of GenAI in this process might make it more difficult for markers
to establish how well a student has demonstrated this. The way in which such outputs are
used as part of an assessment will be considered in grading the assessment against our
marking criteria.
The use of an AI system for any aspect of completing an assessment must be disclosed by a
student. A failure to do so constitutes an academic misconduct. Such a disclosure must cover
the following points:
•
Why was a GenAI system used (help in understanding the question; help in structuring
work based on arguments developed; assist with initial summary of readings etc) ?
•
Which GenAI system or systems was/were used (e.g., ChatGPT, Claude etc)?
7
•
How has the AI output been used in preparing the assessment? (as a research tool, to
test arguments etc; see table below for acceptable uses).
(7) Permitted and prohibited uses of GenAI – Guidance to Students
Unless expressly required for a specific assessment task, Warwick Law School does not
encourage the use of GenAI tools for assessments. Students should be aware that GenAI tools
can weaken the quality of your work – particularly if you rely on GenAI for accuracy, relevance
and rigour. You should be particularly mindful of the tendency of GenAI tools to cite nonexistent resources or information (“hallucinations”). GenAI may generate inaccurate or
otherwise poorly constructed arguments. GenAI does not have the ability to demonstrate
critical thinking, nor the ability to be genuinely creative. Most importantly, assessments are
there for you to demonstrate to us (and to yourself!) how well you have understood what you
have studied.
Nevertheless, WLS acknowledges that some students may use GenAI technology when
preparing for assessments and writing essays, and may want to gain experience of utilising it
for their future legal careers. Below, we provide a clear rule and interpretative guidance on
what would constitute tolerated and prohibited use of GenAI. This is always subject to specific
instructions given for each assessment.
Rule and Guidance
The key overarching rule is: GenAI can act as a personal assistant for you (e.g. assistance in
understanding key issues, help with research, proof-reading your work etc.). However, it must
never be used to create the work, or certain parts of the work, for you. You must not submit
any AI-generated output as your own work.
The table below summarises what is acceptable and what is prohibited in a bit more detail.
Note that any use of GenAI may be prohibited for specific assessment tasks. This might be
the case e.g., where the assessment tests your key legal or academic skills. Here, your own
unaided work would be essential. Always check the assessment instructions before you use
any GenAI tool!
8
YOU CAN
•
Ask questions to GenAI to check your •
understanding of your assessment
question
o Example prompt: “Is the following
question asking for a discussion on
topic X?”
•
Ask GenAI to suggest an outline of the
essay you are going to write, based on
the points you provide to it.
o Careful here! Do not simply ask
GenAI to prepare an outline for
you. Do your preliminary research
and have your points ready. Even
slight variations in the prompt can
produce vastly different results as
can repeating the same prompt
twice or more.
o Example prompt: “Suggest an •
outline for the essay I am going to
write on the topic X. I will argue
for/against Y and the points I will
make in my essay are A, B and C.
My supporting evidence/examples
are D and E.” or “What would be
the best order to argue for/against
Y with the points A, B and C, and
examples D and E?”
•
Ask GenAI to check the grammar, flow,
consistency, language, tone and style
of the essay.
o Example prompt: “Please proof
read
this
essay
and
correct/highlight any errors in
spelling, language or grammar”
o Example prompt: “Check the tone •
and style of this essay and
highlight the parts that need to be
rewritten, but do not rewrite
them!”
YOU MUST NOT
Ask GenAI to generate your assessment
answer for you. Therefore, you should
never start a chat with an GenAI tool, in
which the GenAI would generate points
for you to include in your essay. You must
have developed your own initial thoughts
about the question, and you should have
developed
provisional
arguments,
examples, ideas and your overall response
to the essay question (e.g. do you
agree/disagree and why) before seeking
the assistance of an GenAI tool.
o Example prompt: “I need to write an
essay, but I could not understand the
question. Can you write me an essay
on the following essay question: [the
essay question].”
Ask GenAI to generate some ideas,
arguments, examples from scratch.
o Example prompt: “I need to write an
essay on the topic X, what should I
argue, what should my stance be?
Can you suggest some arguments I
could use?”
o You can only ask GenAI to provide
guidance on the accuracy or validity
of your arguments or improve the
ideas you already have. Asking GenAI
to generate ideas and arguments do
not result in accurate or original
supervised projects. Therefore, you
must always double check what the
GenAI tools suggest to you and never
substitute them for your own voice.
Ask GenAI to rewrite any part of your
essay.
o Example prompt: “Provide some
feedback on the following essay and
rewrite the parts that need
9
•
Use
GenAI
as
a
search
engine/database to find further
sources.
o Careful here! GenAI tools may
sometimes generate sources that
do not exist. Always remember to
check that the source exists; that
the reference/citation is accurate (
check books and journals though
the library pages; check case
databases for cases); verify that
any quotations were taken from
the indicated source etc.
•
Ask GenAI to summarise the content
of academic articles, books, reports or
other sources, although if the work is
relevant to your research, you should
then read it in full.
Careful here! Be mindful that
uploading material protected by
copyright can infringe copyright rules. If
you are unsure, please enquire with the
library first.
•
Ask GenAI to provide feedback on the
project you wrote, before submitting it.
o Example prompt: “Provide some
feedback on the consistency of the
arguments made in the project,
without rewriting it for me.”
o Please remember that GenAI
feedback may not reflect the
assessment criteria. It’s important
to refer to the module's
assessment criteria to fully
understand the expectations.
improvement.” or “Can you provide
some feedback on the following
essay?” (Careful here! GenAI tools
usually tend to rewrite/revise the
text you provide them, unless you
clearly restrict them and/or prohibit
them from rewriting the whole text in
accordance with the feedback they
provide. Therefore, even when you
ask for feedback, you must ensure
that it is you who makes the
necessary changes depending on
that feedback, not AI.)
o Example prompt: “Check the tone
and style of the following essay and
make
the
necessary
changes/improvements to make it
sound more formal.” (You should only
ask for suggestions or for some
emphasis to be made on the parts
that need improvement, you should
never ask any GenAI tool to change
the sentences you have written.
Remember, it should entirely be
your own work, GenAI should not
and cannot be a contributing
author!)
10
(8) Excluding or permitting the use of AI in specific assessment tasks
For each assessment task, staff setting the assessment will consider whether there should be
specific instructions regarding the use of AI, including a complete prohibition on its use. Where
nothing is said, the rule and guidance in the previous section applies.
The University’s Institutional Approach recommends the following wording, depending on
whether AI is required, prohibited, or tolerated (see pp.35-36). The wording is reproduced
here:
“8.2.4 Suggested assignment briefing text where student AI use forms part of the
assessment
This wording is suggested, any appropriate wording that gives sufficient clarity is equally
valid. It is expected that such assessments would contain specific directions on the tool’s
use and how it should be presented. That may render separate wording redundant.
In this assessment you will need to use [AI Tool/Service] as instructed.
You MUST set out clearly [in the body of the answer/in an appendix] how you used the
tool/service, and you SHOULD keep good records such as screen captures for later reference in
case you are called for a viva or other enquiries.
You MUST set out clearly what output from the tool/service has been included, and where you
have altered, adopted, or built on that output.
Assessment briefs must make it clear if a specific tool or service is to be used, or if a student
can choose. If certain tools are not permissible, such as a paid-for service, that must be
made clear in the assessment brief, such as
You MUST NOT use any tool or service requiring any subscription; or
You MUST select from the following: [LIST]
Clear consequences of not abiding by the instructions should be set out, such as a zero
grade, mark cap, mark reduction etc and how such would work.
8.2.5 Suggested wording for the prohibition on the use of AI
This wording is suggested, any appropriate wording that gives sufficient clarity is equally
valid.
You MUST NOT use any generative Artificial Intelligence in this assessment unless specifically
authorised for reasonable adjustments. You MAY use non-generative tools such as a spell-check,
basic grammar check (non-generative), calculator or similar. If you have any doubts about a tool
or service, you plan to use please contact the tutor.
OR
11
You MUST NOT use any form of Artificial Intelligence in this assessment unless specifically
authorised for reasonable adjustments. This includes non-generative AI such as spell-checks,
grammar checks or calculators. If you have any doubts about a tool or service, you plan to use
please contact the tutor.
OR
You MUST NOT use any form of Artificial Intelligence in this assessment unless specifically
authorised for reasonable adjustments. You may use any or all the following tools/services
[LIST]. No other tools or services are permitted.
Clear consequences of not abiding by the instructions should be set out, such as a zero
grade, mark cap, mark reduction etc and how such would work.
8.2.6 Suggested wording for ambivalence towards the use of AI
This wording is suggested, any appropriate wording that gives sufficient clarity is equally
valid.
If you use a generative Artificial Intelligence (GAIT) in the process of completing this assignment
you MUST set out clearly before the bibliography/references [or other suitable place] the following:
• WHY you used a GAIT
• WHAT it was used for
• Which AI was used; and
• If any generated content has been used directly in this submission, if so where.
You will also have to confirm in your declaration that the work remains yours and you have
intellectual ownership of it. You may be called for viva or other interview to demonstrate such
intellectual ownership. A failure to disclose the use of AI, or the use of a misleading description
of its use may have significant consequences for your studies. As a result, keeping good records of
your interactions is strongly advised.”
The way AI generated outputs are used by a student in drafting their assessments will be
taken into account when grading the assessment against the generic grade descriptors and
assessment-specific marking criteria.
12
Academic Integrity Declaration
The University has updated its Academic Integrity Declaration, which now includes the
following paragraph: “Where a generative Artificial Intelligence such as ChatGPT has been
used I confirm I have abided by both the University guidance and specific requirements as set
out in the Student Handbook and the Assessment brief. I have clearly acknowledged the use
of any generative Artificial Intelligence in my submission, my reasoning for using it and which
generative AI (or AIs) I have used. Except where indicated the work is otherwise entirely my
own.”
REVIEW
This policy will continue to evolve and will be reviewed at least annually at the first Education Committee meeting
of the academic year. It will also be reviewed in light of any policy developments at University level or legislative
developments.
13
