ACADEMIC CONDUCT AND
STANDARDS POLICY

Document Title:

Academic Conduct and Standards Policy

Responsible Role and
Department:

Academic Registrar | Registry & Academic Quality

Approving Body:

Senate

Date of Approval:

March 2026

Date Effective From:

1st September 2026

Review Date:

March 2026
University of Winchester
University of Winchester Services Limited

Applies to:
(Strikethrough text, only if
appropriate)

Indicate whether the document is
for public access or internal
access only.
Indicate whether the document
applies to collaborative
provision?
(Strikethrough text, as appropriate)

Note.
This policy applies to all the organisations listed above,
collectively known as the “University” or the “University of
Winchester” for the purpose of this policy.

Public Access
Internal Access Only
Applies to Collaborative Provision

Summary:
This document defines the policy and procedures for dealing with breaches of Academic Conduct.
Note. this policy is underpinned by our commitment to promoting a university wide approach to
health, safety and wellbeing and is supported by the principles of the University Mental Health
Charter. Care has been taken to ensure that the policy is written compassionately, with
consideration of the potential impact on staff and students.

Equality Impact Assessment

Summary of process undertaken
to determine equality impacts:

A review of all protected characteristics and the
engagement requirements of the policy to establish any
detrimental impact of policy, practice or procedure as
defined by the Equality Act 2010.

University Committee (name/ date)
where equality impacts discussed
(may be Committee of approval, or
another):

Academic Regulations, Policy and Procedures Committee

Identified equality impact(s) on colleagues and students
(i.e. any specific impacts related to this policy that may cause disadvantage for people due to
one or more particular protective characteristic)
Protected Characteristic
Age
Disability
Gender Identity
Marriage/Civil Partnership
Pregnancy and Maternity
Race (incl. nationality)
Religion and Belief
Sex
Sexual Orientation

Impact(s) identified and any action(s)/mitigation(s) to
address these impact(s), as necessary.
There are no discernible impacts relating to Age
Recognition of where reasonable adjustments may be
warranted as defined in section 21 of the Equality Act
2010 are embedded throughout the policy.
There are no discernible impacts relating to Gender
Identity.
There are no discernible impacts relating to Marriage or
Civil Partnership status.
Recognition of where reasonable adjustments may be
warranted as defined in section 21 of the Equality Act
2010 are embedded throughout the policy.
There are no discernible impacts relating to Race and
Nationality.
There are no discernible impacts relating to Religion and
Belief
There are no discernible impacts relating to Sex
There are no discernible impacts relating to Sexual
Orientation

Contents
1.

INTRODUCTION, PRINCIPLES and SCOPE of POLICY ........................................................... 5

2.

GOOD ACADEMIC PRACTICE – What does it mean if I fall below expected standards? ...... 6

3.

EXAMPLES OF BREACHES OF ACADEMIC CONDUCT and STANDARDS .......................... 7

4.

HOW WILL THE UNIVERSITY INVESTIGATE ACADEMIC MISCONDUCT? ........................... 7

5.

APPEALS ................................................................................................................................ 17

6.

COMPLETION OF PROCEDURES LETTER ........................................................................... 17

7.

REVIEW BY THE OFFICE OF THE INDEPENDENT ADJUDICATOR ..................................... 17

1.

INTRODUCTION, PRINCIPLES and SCOPE of POLICY

1.1

The University has a responsibility to ensure that academic standards are maintained to the
highest possible level as required by the Office for Students B Conditions of Registration.

1.2

We promote a culture of integrity and ethical scholarship underpinned by robust and fair
assessment processes.

1.3

This policy relates to all levels of study for which students submit work as part of their
undergraduate and postgraduate taught programmes, postgraduate research programmes and
any other credit bearing programmes.

1.4

The following are expectations that the University sets for all student work submitted for
assessment:
a. The appropriate acknowledgement of sources of information used in academic
work according to the permission, citation and referencing practices of your
discipline of study;
b. Never seeking unfair advantage for yourself or others in any form of assessed
academic work;
c. Supporting collaboration with others where appropriate but always producing your
own work independently when required;
d. Never seeking or obtaining unauthorised external assistance in the creation of academic
work;
e. Always presenting unfalsified and accurate data, imagery, documentation and
information in all your assessed work;
f.

Recognising the contribution of others, providing fair and appropriate credit for
work done by others, including your supervisory team;

g. Declaring when you have permission to use academic work that you have previously
submitted in another academic context and appropriately acknowledging its use;
h. Undertaking research ethically, following all regulatory, legal, and
professional requirements.
1.5

University study presents different challenges for different students and learners dependent on
how and where you may have previously studied. Therefore, we will always take a balanced
approach to cases of academic misconduct dependent on your level of study and length of
previous study at the University. Consequently, we expect you to develop your skills over time,
with support and guidance, and to learn from any errors made. It is your responsibility to
understand what is expected of you and to seek support and guidance when needed.

1.6

All students submitting work to be assessed are declaring that the work is their own creation
and that it has not been produced through generative AI technologies unless explicitly directed
or permitted. Misuse of technologies for the creation of content passed off as your own will
always be challenged, and the University will utilise all proportionate means to identify work it
suspects you may not have produced yourself.
How will the University determine cases of Academic Misconduct?

1.7

There are no time limits to commencing an investigation into breaches of academic
integrity. You can be investigated even after you have been awarded your degree.

1.8

Students studying for a University of Winchester award at a collaborative academic partner
institutions will be subject to either the University or partner institution policy and procedures
or both depending on the nature of their study route and you may be subject to the same

penalties and sanctions as deemed appropriate.
1.9

If you are being investigated under these processes, you will be kept informed of the
allegations and the processes to be followed. You will be given time and opportunity to
respond to any allegation. We will communicate with you regularly via your Unimail account
and provide you with the necessary support and guidance. We adopt the principles of
compassionate communication wherever possible and so will seek to avoid unnecessary
disruption to your studies at times of assessment wherever possible.

1.10

Investigations will be determined on a ‘balance of probability’ basis, where evidence
indicates it is more likely than less likely that you have fallen below expected
academic standards.

1.11

The University reserves the right to investigate anonymous complaints where there is
strong, creditable and verifiable evidence to support an academic conduct
investigation.

1.12

Records of investigations where there has been a finding of no case to answer will only be
retained for analysis of trend data, and to facilitate enhancement of support provided to
students in relation to academic misconduct. The University retains students’ assessed work
for a period of ten (10) years subsequent to completion of studies ensuring compliance with
Office for Students (OfS) regulations.

1.13

Where allegations relate to students on courses with a professional body and Fitness to
Practise expectations, academic conduct investigations may combine with a Fitness to
Practise process at the discretion of the Academic Registrar. The University retains the right
to disclose proven breaches against you and any penalties and sanctions to professional
bodies, where it is necessary and appropriate to do so under the requirements of professional
registration. The University will disclose all personal information in accordance with its Data
Protection Policy.

1.14

Reasonable adjustments will be put in place where you have declared disabilities to help you
engage with the process. An Academic Conduct breach is determined, then exceptional,
personal, medical or family circumstances may be considered if they are relevant, but solely
for the purpose of deciding an appropriate level of sanction.

1.15

Independent and confidential advice around the academic integrity process can be sought
from the Students’ Union Advice Centre. You are encouraged to engage with this support
and advice which is available for all stages of an academic conduct investigation process.

1.16

The application of the University’s Academic Conduct and Standards Policy may be subject to
review by the Office of the Independent Adjudicator in the context of any cases determined by
the University. Students who are dissatisfied with the University process or outcome may
apply to this scheme. Details are found in section 7 of this policy.

2.

GOOD ACADEMIC PRACTICE – What does it mean if I fall below
expected standards?

2.1

Academic judgement of your work may indicate that you have fallen below expected standards
of established academic practice as directed in your assessment guidance. These instances
are not Academic Misconduct in nature and do not require formal investigation under this
policy.

2.2

You may be required, or it may be recommended, that you undertake Additional Learning to
support you in your academic development. Additional Learning comprises engagement with
academic skills development either provided to you at your programme or subject level or from
the Academic Success team.

2.3

You are expected to meet the specific requirements for all of your assessed work as defined in
your assessment guidance as well as meeting the expected academic standards as they are
explained to you.

2.4

Where a marking tutor, through their academic judgement, deems that you have made
avoidable mistakes, but that these do not meet the threshold for an allegation of Academic
Misconduct, then your assessment grade will reflect the lower standards expressed by you and
you will receive feedback to help you improve. Your grade is then added to your academic
record.

2.5

It is acknowledged that, with additional support, guidance and engagement with Additional
Learning, you will be less likely to repeat the same mistakes as you progress through your
studies.

2.6

Your Personal Academic Tutor can assist you in accessing resources to help you improve your
academic skills and it is your responsibility to engage with the feedback provided to you.

3.

EXAMPLES OF BREACHES OF ACADEMIC CONDUCT and STANDARDS

3.1

The following are considered breaches of academic conduct and are typically
associated with seeking an unfair advantage when presenting work for assessment:
a. Plagiarism is when you use someone else’s work, ideas, words or intellectual property
in your work without giving them appropriate acknowledgement, i.e. referencing
correctly. It can be in the form of verbatim or near-verbatim copying or paraphrasing
without acknowledgement. Self-plagiarism is when you re-use your own work without
permission or acknowledgement.
b. Cheating is when you deceitfully or fraudulently obtain an unfair advantage in an
assessment, for instance by bringing unauthorised materials into an exam venue.
c. Collusion is when you work with another student/s or other individuals in an
unauthorised way to create a piece of assessed work where the expectation is that the
submitted work should be solely your own and created by yourself.
d. Contract cheating, sometimes referred to as ‘ghosting’ or ‘passing off’, is when you
commission a third party to produce work, whole or in parts, which you declare as your
own work through the submission process. This can include unauthorised use of
generative technology which you do not acknowledge.
e. Falsification is when you attempt to present fictitious or distorted material
contributing to an assessment or falsify evidence to support special considerations,
e.g. for Exceptional Circumstance claims.
f.

Unethical conduct is when you deviate from the ethical standards for academic work,
as defined in the University Research Ethics Policy

g. Personation is the assumption by one person of the identity of another person with
intent to deceive or to gain unfair advantage. An example is where you have someone
other than yourself undertake an assessment on your behalf, e.g. an examination.

4.

HOW WILL THE UNIVERSITY INVESTIGATE ACADEMIC MISCONDUCT?

4.1

PART ONE: Initial Identification of Potential Academic Misconduct

4.1.1

If a marking tutor suspects academic misconduct in your coursework they will send written
details to the Associate Dean for the Faculty, or nominee in their absence, as soon as
practicable and no later than five (5) working days of initiating assessment of your work.
Feedback and grading will be paused while investigations are undertaken.

4.1.2

If an invigilator in an examination suspects you of attempting to gain improper advantage,
they shall inform you of their suspicions, confiscate any unauthorised materials or devices,
allow you to continue with the examination, and complete a written report to Registry and
your Associate Dean with any evidence, after the examination has ended. Evidence relating
to Personation will be gathered through checking and copying the ID presented and
referenced against photographic records or any other legitimate means.

4.1.3

In all cases the written report of suspected academic misconduct to the Associate Dean will:
a. Specify your name, student ID, programme and level of study;
b. Provide all details of your assessment
c. State the basis and evidence on which the allegation is made
d. Provide all evidence. This should include where appropriate: your assignment with
clear indications of where the misconduct is considered and the appropriate evidence
that supports the allegation.
e. Include confirmation where there are any programmatic or PSRB implications for your
continuing study if an allegation is upheld.

4.1.4

If an allegation against you is made by another student or staff member, a third party, or
retrospectively outside of the current academic year or after Progression and Awarding
Boards, it should be referred to the Associate Dean or nominee who will consult with the
Academic Registrar about how best to proceed.

4.2

University Response to an Allegation of Academic Misconduct

Academic Misconduct cases are considered at different levels as follows:

Level
1
2
3
4
4.2.1

Undergraduate, Postgraduate Taught and Postgraduate Research
Minor Plagiarism or failing to incorporate previous Additional Learning e.g. significant
referencing errors
Plagiarism (with intent to deceive), minor misuse of generative technologies,
Fabrication or Falsification (including significant misuse of generative technologies), Cheating
and Contract Cheating, Collusion, Personation, significant Unethical Conduct
Extensive and repeated breaches of academic misconduct
The Associate Dean will initially consider the allegations and evidence provided and will
determine within 10 working days of notification by the marking tutor or invigilator whether
on the available evidence:
a. There is no academic conduct case to answer. If so, the work should be marked as
normal, and no record of the allegation kept. Where determined that you have fallen below
expected academic standards then this will be reflected in the grade and feedback.
b. Level one: you will be informed of the academic misconduct allegation(s) by the
Associate Dean where evidence confirms the allegation and that no further investigation
is required at this level. You will be notified of the sanction(s) and how you will be
required to proceed if you accept the sanction. This would then conclude the
investigation and process. If you wished for an investigation (as per Section 4.3 below) to
be undertaken, then you would be granted this under your right to response within 10
working days of receipt of the notification. A subsequent investigation may result in the
Level One sanction being confirmed, application of appropriate sanctions at a higher
level or de-escalation to marking and grading processes.
Your academic record will then be updated with a Level One outcome.
Where the Associate Dean has determined there is a potential case to answer at Levels
Two, Three, or Four they shall appoint an Academic Conduct Officer for the following:
c. Levels Two, Three or Four: you will be informed (see Section 4.3 below) of the academic
misconduct allegation and that a full investigation, conducted by the Associate Dean
appointed Academic Conduct Officer, will now commence and you will be provided with
support and guidance on what you are required to do.

4.2.2

The Academic Conduct Officer will confirm this to academic.integrity@winchester.ac.uk and
your student record will be updated accordingly.

4.3

Action to be taken where an Academic Misconduct investigation is required

4.3.1

For Levels Two, Three or Four cases of academic misconduct, the Academic Conduct
Officer will notify you in writing of the details of the allegation against you (copying
academic.integrity@winchester.ac.uk) confirming the allegation and, where appropriate,
provide the following:
a. details of the nature of your alleged offence;
b. the initial findings;
c. a copy of the Academic Conduct and Standards Policy;
d. any evidence which supports the allegation against you, including the
tutor’s/invigilator’s/examiner of PGR viva/other’s written report or any technology report;
e. a request that you respond to confirm or deny the allegation and inviting you to put
forward any further or mitigating evidence to be taken into account, and;
f.

the deadline for you to reply is within ten (10) working days of the Academic Conduct
Officer’s email

4.3.2

Investigations should take no more than 15 working days, but if more time is needed to
investigate the allegation or seek further evidence, the Academic Conduct Officer will write
to you to confirm the details of the offence and that the investigation is on-going and
estimate, where possible, when this might be completed. All further evidence will be sent to
you.

4.3.3

The Academic Conduct Officer may ask you to provide your notes, drafts, and any other
records relating to your preparatory work for the assessment. Any failure to provide this
material is likely to be considered when a decision is made about potential academic
misconduct.

4.3.4

If the Academic Conduct Officer considers it necessary, you may be required to attend an
Academic Conduct Interview to allow you an opportunity to demonstrate that the work is your
own and to answer any questions that may indicate otherwise as a result of the investigation.
This is an opportunity for you to defend your work and provide explanations for the
allegations against you. Academic Conduct Interviews will be conducted by a member of
academic staff, usually the marking tutor, with support from the Academic Conduct Officer,
Associate Dean or other appropriate nominated authority. The Academic Conduct Interview
is part of the investigation and will not determine the outcome of the allegation. Notes of the
interview as well as a recording of the interview will be made available to you along with a
transcript.

4.3.5

If you do not respond to the Academic Conduct Officer’s email confirming that there is an
allegation of academic misconduct being investigated, the University shall interpret this to
mean that you do not wish to deny the allegation and the investigation can conclude
accordingly with the application of appropriate sanctions and the reason for these
sanctions to be applied.

4.3.6

Once all the available evidence and your response have been considered, the Academic
Conduct Officer will decide one of the following:
a. There is no case to answer against you. If so, your work will be marked and no
record kept of an investigation and you will be informed;
b. The issue could now be considered as not meeting the threshold for academic misconduct
but that of a case of falling below expected academic standards (see Section 2 above) not
evident before the investigation commenced (see Section 2 above) and should be reflected in
your grade and feedback;
c. You have admitted the allegations and a sanction can be imposed as outlined in section
4.5.3;
d. You have admitted the allegations, but the issue must proceed with an Academic
Conduct Panel because the suggested sanction falls under their remit to authorise or
recommend;
e. You deny the allegations and therefore the issue must proceed to an Academic
Conduct Panel.

4.3.7

A final report will then be completed and sent to you and
academic.integrity@winchester.ac.uk. This will detail what you are expected to
undertake as per the sanctions detailed below in Section 4.5.3 and the support
available to you.
4.3.8

Where the resolution of an investigation cannot be reached prior to the last
Progression and Awards Board of the Summer (typically September), which could
impact your ability to continue with your studies, the Academic Registrar will review the
case. A determination will be made as to whether continuation of your studies be
permitted and whether it is appropriate to require additional sanctions, as per Section
4.5.3, or other academic requirements in order to maintain academic standards and
facilitate your on-time continuation of studies.

Academic Misconduct Procedures and Other Policies and Regulations
4.3.9

Allegations relating to potential intimidation/coercion of witnesses or falsification of evidence
will be handled with reference to the Student Conduct and Disciplinary Policy.

4.3.10 An academic conduct investigation process may be paused while disciplinary processes are
initiated. Where there are concurrent appeal investigations underway, such as Academic,
Exceptional Circumstance, Fitness to Practise, Interruption and Withdrawal or Conduct and
Disciplinary appeals, the Academic Conduct investigation or the Appeal investigation may
be paused under authority of the Academic Registrar where the outcome of one process is

reliant on the conclusion of another.

4.4

Convening an Academic Conduct Panel

4.4.1

An Academic Conduct Panel shall be convened at the earliest opportunity if you have denied
the allegations or where the appropriate sanction indicated by the investigation falls under
Levels 2 to 4. The purpose of the Panel will be to consider, on the basis of all the evidence
and representations, whether the allegations are proven on a balance of probabilities, i.e. if it
is more likely than less likely that the alleged academic offence(s) occurred, and, if so, what
sanction should be applied.

4.4.2

The Panel will consist of the Academic Registrar or nominee (Chair), one academic member
of staff and panel Secretary will be in attendance to the panel. Where there is an instance of a
previous upheld allegation of academic misconduct, the panel members will be advised
accordingly once they have determined the current case so that the appropriate level of
sanction may be determined. Where previous offences are minor or deemed not to be an
escalation or persistence of the same type of misconduct, then the Panel will be instructed to
only determine an outcome on the facts of the present case.

4.4.3

The Panel Secretary will ensure that you have all relevant documents and information
related to the case and Panel and will arrange all venues, meeting links and
communications with parties attending.

4.4.4

The Panel will be held on the University campus, or online via Teams. If you are unable to
attend the Panel due to ill health, or other exceptional reasons, then you are required to
submit medical or other evidence, and the Panel will be postponed where reasonable to do
so.

4.4.5

If you do not appear at the Panel, the Panel may proceed to deal with the allegation in your
absence provided the Chair of the Panel is satisfied that you have been properly notified of
the sitting of the Panel.

4.4.6

You have a right to be accompanied to the Panel by a member of the University
community to support you who must be independent of the allegation and may be a fellow
student, an Officer or staff member advocate from the Students’ Union. This person can
advise and support you but not answer questions on your behalf. You must notify the
Academic Conduct Officer should you wish to be accompanied.

4.4.7

You will, alongside members of the Academic Conduct Panel together with the Academic
Conduct Officer and any other witnesses due to appear before the Panel, receive at least five
(5) working days’ written notice of the date, time and place of the meeting of the Panel (sent
by email). The email shall be accompanied by all documents relevant to the meeting.

INTENTIONALLY
BLANK

4.5

Sanctions for Academic Misconduct

4.5.1

Sanctions will be recommended by an Academic Conduct Officer, Academic Conduct
Panel, and/or Appeal Determiner in accordance with the following principles and based
on the outlined sanctions available to them outlined below and in section 4.5.3.

4.5.2

Principles

Sanctions, as detailed below in Section 4.5.3, will be considered on the basis of:
a. The proportion of the work affected by the misconduct, the potential contribution of the
affected work towards the overall mark, opportunities for prior feedback relating to the
offences, the number of previous and contemporaneous offences and the existence of
evidence of intention to deceive or coerce.
b. Exceptional Circumstances or other factors will be heard where raised in relation to any
mitigation or escalation of sanctions. Where a misconduct offence has been recorded
previously against you, a sanction above that previously applied will be levied where it is
determined by the investigation and panel that the further offence is an escalation of
misconduct.
c. All misconduct cases against students who have already received an award must be
determined by an Academic Conduct Panel chaired by the Academic Registrar or
appropriate nominee from the University Leadership Team.
d. If a sanction indicated by the Academic Conduct Officer prevents a student from
completing their studies, the matter must be referred to an Academic Conduct Panel
chaired by the Academic Registrar or nominee.
e. If a sanction indicated by the Academic Conduct Panel involves terminating with or
without an exit award, the matter must be referred to the University Executive Leadership

Team for approval.
f.

If a case is proven against a graduate of the University and is considered to have
affected the award or classification of award made to the student, the reclassification or
revocation of award will be approved by Senate under the authority of the Vice
Chancellor or nominee.

INTENTIONALLY
BLANK

4.5.3

Sanctions available for examples of academic misconduct include:
Level

Sanction Options

One
Two

Requirement for Additional Learning and 10% Grade
Penalty (for graded work)*
•
•

Three

•

Four

•

All Undergraduate All
and Postgraduate Postgraduate
Taught Students
Research
Students
Yes
No (not
applicable)

Requirement for Additional Learning and 25% Grade
Penalty*
OR
Requirement for Additional Learning and to resubmit a new
piece of work for capped grades
Requirement for Additional Learning and Repeat Study for
capped grades

Yes

No grade
penalties but
Additional
Learning

Yes

Yes (no grade
capping)

Termination of programme registration and/or withdrawal
from the University

Yes

Yes

Authority to approve Sanction

Academic Conduct Officer and/or
Associate Dean or Academic
Conduct Panel
Academic Conduct Officer and/or
Associate Dean or Academic
Conduct Panel
Academic Registrar or Director of
Research & Innovation
subsequent to Panel
recommendation
Executive Leadership Team
subsequent to Academic Registrar
or Director of Research &
Innovation endorsement.

Vice Chancellor, as Chair of
Senate, subsequent to Academic
• Revocation or Reclassification of award post completion of
Registrar or Director of Research
studies
& Innovation endorsement.
*Where grade penalties take a substantive grade below the pass threshold, the student will be required to submit a new piece of work for capped grades.
Examples of Sanction Levels
Level
1
2
3
4

Undergraduate, Postgraduate Taught and Postgraduate Research
Minor Plagiarism or failing to incorporate previous Additional Learning e.g. significant referencing errors
Plagiarism (with intent to deceive), minor misuse of generative technologies,
Fabrication or Falsification (including significant misuse of generative technologies), Cheating and Contract Cheating, Collusion, Personation
or significant breach of expected Ethics standards
Extensive and repeated breaches of academic misconduct

5.

APPEALS

5.1

Appeals against process followed, and/or sanctions set should be submitted in writing to
academic.integrity@winchester.ac.uk

5.1.1

You can appeal decisions, on the grounds that:
a. Evidence supports that the sanction(s) levied was not reasonable in the
circumstances of the case
b. There is new evidence, not previously available, which could change the
determination of academic misconduct
c. There is evidence that the University did not follow policy or process as determined in this
policy

5.1.2

Appeals must be submitted in writing within ten (10) working days of the date of the written
confirmation of the outcome. Appeals should be sent to academic.integrity@winchester.ac.uk
clearly stating the grounds and reasons for the appeal.

5.1.3

Appeals will be considered by the Academic Registrar, or nominee where the Academic
Registrar was the original Academic Conduct Panel Chair. Their decision will be final.

6.

COMPLETION OF PROCEDURES LETTER

6.1

A Completion of Procedures letter (COP) will be available for issue at the point where all
internal processes available for internal review have been exhausted. This would usually be
at the end of the appeal stage but would also cover situations where an appeal request is
out of time or not within permissible grounds for consideration.

6.2

If a student has had a decision that is not in their favour at the end of the appeal process, then
a COP letter will be issued automatically. If a student has an outcome in their favour or partly
in their favour at the end of that process (e.g., at the end of appeal stage), or is out of time,
then a COP letter will be issued if it is requested within 28 days of the communication of the
outcome.

7.

REVIEW BY THE OFFICE OF THE INDEPENDENT ADJUDICATOR

7.1

Students and former students who are dissatisfied with the outcome of the University’s
internal complaints procedures may refer the matter to the Office of the Independent
Adjudicator (OIA) within 12 months of the date of issue of the Completion of Procedures
Letter. Further information can be obtained from the Students’ Union Advice Centre or the
OIA website (www.oiahe.ac.uk).

Appendix 1:
1. Conduct of the Academic Conduct Panel
a. Notes of the Panel will be taken by a member of Registry and Academic Quality who
will act as the Secretary;
b. All Panel members may ask you questions as they pertain to the specific allegations
against you;
c. The Panel may ask questions of the Investigating Officer;
d. You will be able to ask questions yourself and also respond to any answers from the
Investigating Officer in your defence;
e. The proceedings will be summarised by the Panel Chair and you will be given the
opportunity to confirm that you are satisfied that these are a true reflection of the Panel
discussions;
f.

You will receive a copy of the Panel decision and the Panel minutes from the Secretary
who will also inform you of the Panel outcome:

2. The Secretary will inform you of the outcome and any sanction in writing within five (5) working
days and copy this to your Programme Leader, Programme Administrator, Academic Liaison
Officer (for Collaborative Partners), Head of Department and Chair of the Faculty Progression
and Award Board or Postgraduate Student Progress Committee, Ethics Committee Chair, as
appropriate.
3. If the Panel determines that there is no case to answer or that the breach is a failure to meet
expected academic standards, then processes relevant to those findings will be followed as
outlined in sections 2 and 4.2.1.
