CLM Faculty: Staff Guidelines for Learning and
Teaching with Generative AI Tools
Version: September 2024
Adapted from: Centre for Innovation in Learning and Teaching (2023). Teaching and
Learning with AI Tools. University of Cape Town. CC BY.

Introduction
Artificial Intelligence (AI) is a range of technologies that perform cognitive tasks, through
machine learning, natural language processing, data mining, neural networks or an
algorithm (Zawacki-Richter et al., 2019). One of the technologies within AI is Generative AI
(GAI). ChatGPT is the most well-known GAI that has been in the spotlight since its public
release in November 2022. ChatGPT, which stands for Chat Generative Pre-Trained
Transformer, has a basic version available to anyone who signs up for a free account, while
a more advanced version (ChatGPT Plus) is available as a subscription service. It can
perform various natural language processing tasks, such as, generating and classifying text,
providing answers to questions in a conversational style and translating texts from one
language to another. Some claim ChatGPT will become the “greatest cheating machine
ever”, while others suggest it will open new possibilities to augment our skills by helping to
automate mundane and routine tasks.

The aim of this faculty guideline document is to recommend how lecturers can consider
learning and teaching given the impact of GAI tools. This guideline document should be read
in conjunction with the companion guidelines:

   •   CLM Staff Guidelines for Generative AI Tools with Assessment
   •   CLM Guidelines for Effective Prompting with Generative AI Tools
   •   CLM Researcher Guidelines for the Ethical Use of Generative AI Tools
   •   CLM Student Guidelines for Generative AI Tools in Higher Education
Guidelines and principles linked to assessment, learning and teaching in other institutional
documents should also be taken into consideration when incorporating GAI:

   •   The five-year Wits Learning and Teaching Plan
   •   Senate Standing Orders on the Assessment of Student Learning

1. Common GAI Tools
Here is a comparison of well-known GAI tools (adapted from Ithaka S-R, 2024). Most of
these have mobile apps too:

                                                                                            1
 Tool            Website                          Information
 ChatGPT         https://chatgpt.com/             • Registration is required.
 (Open AI)                                        • ChatGPT Free has limited access to 4.o (but
                                                      no access to data after January 2022).
                                                  • ChatGPT Plus requires a $20 monthly
                                                      subscription .
                                                  • ChatGPT Plus can access real-time
                                                      information from the internet, which means
                                                      responses draw on more up-to-date
                                                      sources.

 Gemini          https://gemini.google.com/       •   Google account is required to use.
 (Google)                                         •   Replaced Google Bard.
                                                  •   Linked to other Google apps.

 Copilot         https://copilot.microsoft.com/   •   Our recommended GAI tool to use: If you
 (Microsoft)                                          login with your Wits credentials the user
                                                      and company data are protected and not
                                                      shared back to the tool for training.
                                                  •   No registration is required.
                                                  •   Replaced Bing.
                                                  •   Built using GPT-4.
                                                  •    Can access real-time information from the
                                                      internet, which means responses draw on
                                                      more up-to-date sources. It can provide
                                                      sources as a search extension (but source
                                                      verification is still required).

 Claude          https://claude.ai/               •   Registration is required.
 (Anthropic)                                      •   Claude Basic is free.
                                                  •   Does not have access to real-time internet
                                                      information.
                                                  •   Claude Pro requires a $20 monthly
                                                      subscription.

 Meta AI         https://www.meta.ai/             •   No registration required.
 (Meta)                                           •   Free version integrated into Facebook and
                                                      WhatsApp.
                                                  •   Built using Llama-3.

Also, there are many ways GAI is being built into a variety of tools and platforms to use in
education and the work environment. Here are a few examples that have a free version (the
free versions may have limited features):

             •   Interactive Chatbot (You)
             •   Writing/text (Grammarly, Sudowrite, Lex, QuillBot)
             •   Visual (DALL.E 2, Midjourney, DeepAI, Leonardo.Ai)
             •   Video (Haiper, Invideo AI, Descript, D-iD, HeyGen )
             •   Voice or text-to-speech (ElevenLabs, Murf)

                                                                                                   2
          •   Presentations (Tome, SlidesAI)
          •   Lesson planning and teaching resources (Eduaide, Teachermatic)
          •   Research and summaries (Elicit, Scholarcy, Perplexity AI, SciSpace)

2. Principles for GAI Use in Education
While there can be negative associations with the use of GAI in higher education, these
tools provide the opportunity for us to rethink how we approach learning, teaching and
assessment. The Russell Group of Universities in the United Kingdom (2023, p. 1) note that:

       The rise of generative artificial intelligence (AI) has the potential for a profound
       impact on the ways in which we teach, learn, assess, and access education. Our
       universities wish to ensure that generative AI tools can be used for the benefit of
       students and staff – enhancing teaching practices and student learning experiences,
       ensuring students develop skills for the future within an ethical framework, and
       enabling educators to benefit from efficiencies to develop innovative methods of
       teaching.

The Russell Group (2023) has further created a set of five principles, all of which are deemed
applicable to the Faculty of Commerce, Law, and Management (CLM):

   1. Support students and staff to become AI-literate.
   2. Equip staff to support students to use GAI tools effectively and appropriately in
      their learning experience.
   3. Adapt learning, teaching and assessment to incorporate the ethical use of GAI and
      support equal access.
   4. Ensure that academic rigour and integrity are upheld.
   5. Work collaboratively to share good practices as the technologies and their
      application in education evolves.

3. Managing Expectations
Outlining what schools, programmes or courses expect from students around the use of
GAI tools in learning and teaching is essential, especially before any assessments are
undertaken. Lecturers should set clear expectations of when it is admissible to use and
when not. While the temptation may be to ban the use of these tools completely, we
recommend that rather than aiming to prevent students from using GAI, lecturers should
make expectations about the use of GAI explicit and visible to students. Additionally,
engaging with colleagues and students alike to promote debate and knowledge sharing is
essential and forms part of the development of new literacies for education and work.

Some higher education institutions have attempted to ban the use of GAI. In these
institutions, students using GAI are considered to have been academically dishonest, with
severe penalties. While academic integrity is a concern, taking a punitive approach is not
likely to stop the use of GAI. We recommend an approach that seeks to build key skills for

                                                                                            3
the future. It is likely that GAI will become increasingly integrated in the world of work,
across the education landscape, and in everyday life. For this reason, trying to control its
use and evolution could be considered futile. Higher education must adapt to incorporate
the emerging uses of new technologies that our graduates will likely use. However, we need
to be mindful of the ethical issues associated with using GAI in education. See the CLM
Researcher Guidelines and CLM Staff Guidelines on Assessment for more information.

4. Considerations for Using GAI Tools in Higher Education
There are several considerations to keep in mind when staff and students use GAI tools.
Relevance of data set: Generative AI may not have the latest information or developments
in a field. For example, ChatGPT version 3.5 was trained on data up until 2022. This means
that the outputs have to be verified against other data sources. Additionally, the sources of
the output from GAI tools cannot be easily verified.
Hallucinations: While GAI outputs may come across as authoritative and convincing, its
responses are based on next word predictions. The software has no real understanding of
the information it is providing. This leads to what are known as ‘hallucinations’, thus
resulting in misinformation. When using GAI tools, the outputs must be verified for accuracy
and reliability. It is also advisable to consult additional, trusted sources to ensure that the
information provided is appropriate and accurate. In fact, it is recommended not to use GAI
tools to prompt for “factual” outputs or rely on outputs as being factual (i.e., GAI tools
should not be used in the same way as Google searches for example).
Dependence/Overreliance for Writing or Thinking: Assessments (such as written
assignments) serve the purpose of helping students learn and practice skills relevant to
their discipline. While GAI can help automate some tasks, it is important to guard against
over reliance, to prevent individual’s ability to craft and think critically from being
unnecessarily influenced. Research suggests that while GAI can lead to efficiencies in
decision making, being over reliant on GAI can lead to cognitive overload.
Additional important ethical considerations for learning and teaching:
   • Academic integrity – There should be an emphasis on the distinction between using
       GAI as an enabler or in a supporting way and using GAI as an authoring tool that
       impacts on academic integrity. Unless made explicit, it can be tempting for students
       to present AI generated work as their own, since it is not ‘copied’ as in the traditional
       form of plagiarism (see CLM GAI Assessment Guidelines for more information).
   • Privacy and data risks – GAI systems collect a lot of data (for example, ChatGPT
       requires registration with an email and phone number), and these systems can track
       personal information and activity. Open AI’s Privacy Policy clearly states that “By
       using our Service, you understand and acknowledge that your Personal Information
       will be processed and stored in our facilities and servers in the United States and
       may be disclosed to our service providers and affiliates in other jurisdictions”.
       Therefore, users are strongly advised not to submit any personal information to
       GAI tools. Additionally, no student should be forced to make use of a specific GAI
       tool where they must give personal information.
                                                                                              4
   •   Built in-biases – GAI follows the “garbage-in-garbage out” principle. In other words,
       if the data that the system was trained on is biased, inaccurate, or questionable,
       then the responses generated will reflect that bias. GAI tools are trained using
       datasets that contain implicit and explicit biases (e.g., lack of cultural diversity,
       dominance of Western hegemonic knowledge, racism, sexism). Biases may include
       historical, representative, algorithmic, ranking, behavioural and social biases. Users
       must be aware of the potential biases contained in AI generated outputs and should
       critically evaluate the information before using it.
   •   Exploitation of labour – there have been allegations of exploitative labour practices
       in the training of GAI tools. There is often a significant human component required to
       support the continuation of GAI tools. There is also an environmental impact of
       running GAI tools.
   •   Plagiarism – GAI tools represent information developed by others and so there is the
       risk of plagiarised content and/or copyright infringement being submitted by a user
       as their own. Artwork used by AI-image generators may have been included in the AI
       database without the creator’s consent or licence.
   •   Accessibility – there is a risk that those with poorer access to connectivity, devices,
       data, and literacies will get unequal access to the opportunities being provided by
       GAI. More powerful AI capabilities may be monetised and only available to those
       with resources. In a context with existing inequalities, those planning to use these
       tools for learning and teaching should be cognisant of unequal access on the part of
       students.

5. Exploring GAI Tool Usage in Learning and Teaching
While we must be responsible in how we use the emerging capabilities of GAI tools, there
are also interesting new opportunities to be explored, depending on your context and your
students. The table of use cases below is not exhaustive but provides a glimpse of the
potential for learning and teaching.
 Staff Use                                        Student Use
 Content Refinement: Using GAI to assist in       Concept Understanding and Reinforcement:
 refining or improving educational materials      GAI-powered tools that help students
 such as lesson plans, quizzes, rubrics, and      understand and reinforce complex concepts
 interactive content.                             through interactive explanations,
                                                  visualisations, and practice exercises.

 Intelligent Tutoring Systems: Deploying GAI-     Virtual Mentor: Accessing a virtual mentor or
 powered tutoring systems that adapt to           tutor, powered by AI, to provide guidance and
 individual student needs.                        support throughout their learning journey.
 Automated Administrative Tasks: Utilising        Language Learning Support: Using GAI-based
 GAI for automating administrative tasks such     language learning tools that simulate
 as scheduling, and record-keeping.               conversations, provide instant feedback, and
                                                  generate language exercises.
 Adaptive Learning Paths: Creating                Personalised Learning Paths / Assessments:
 personalised learning paths for students based   Students receiving tailored learning paths or
 on their individual progress and needs. Canvas   assessments based on their individual
 already supports differentiated assignments      strengths and weaknesses and that provide
 through Mastery Paths.                           personalised feedback.

                                                                                              5
 Virtual / Augmented Reality Simulations:             Skills Development and Practice: Using AI-
 Integrating GAI with virtual reality technology to   based platforms to develop and practice
 create immersive educational simulations             specific skills, such as coding or language
                                                      proficiency.

Additionally, the UNESCO Quick Guide (UNESCO, 2023) has also outlined 10 educational
‘roles’ for GAI tools, ranging from ‘Socratic opponent’ to ‘study buddy’.

6. The Importance of Critical AI Literacies
In addition to academic literacies, additional literacies are required for all stakeholders to
navigate GAI effectively. AI literacy involves sound knowledge about the basic functions of
AI, the ability to ethically use AI tools, a familiarity with AI concepts and applications in
different scenarios, the ability to critically evaluate AI technologies, and the skill to
communicate and collaborate effectively with AI (Ng et al., 2021). AI literacy includes
understanding what AI can be used for and what it does not do well.
Users must understand the basic operation of large language models and be familiar with
the inherent limits of the systems they are making use of. For example, the lack of common
sense or real understanding contained in AI generated responses, which allows for
unrealistic or inaccurate answers. A critical skill required in terms of AI Literacy is what is
known as prompt engineering (see CLM Prompting Guidelines). In other words, how to
formulate the prompts that are fed into the GAI tool, thus providing accurate parameters
and guidelines for how the GAI should respond.
Bearing in mind that Large Language Models (LLMs) are based on predictions using the
dataset they are trained on, and that AI-generated information is not always accurate and
authentic, it is vital for users (both staff and students) to be critically literate when it comes
to using GAI. This may mean creating components of courses that build students’ capacity
to effectively understand and apply GAI tools both in their educational projects and their
disciplines. Designing learning activities that challenge students to interact with GAI to get
a sense of its capabilities, and to evaluate its value and outputs can be incorporated into
courses. Treating GAI as another tool in learning and teaching that students are expected to
gain skills and competence in, shifts the focus from the deficit and punitive to becoming a
resource for achieving tasks and enhancing learning.
Opportunities to develop information literacy should form part of students’ learning
experiences. Ultimately, students should be able to identify what information is required to
complete their assignments or assessments, and then evaluate this information and
communicate it in an ethical and appropriate manner. One way of achieving this is by
scaffolding information literacy for effective learning across courses in a programme.

                                                                                                    6
References
Atlas, S. (2023). ChatGPT for Higher Education and Professional Development: A Guide to
      Conversational            AI.        University        of          Rhode        Island.
      https://digitalcommons.uri.edu/cba_facpubs/548
Claremont Colleges. (2018). Claremont Colleges Critical Information Literacy Habits of
      Mind.                                                https://library.claremont.edu/wp-
      content/uploads/2018/02/Information_Literacy_Habits-of-Mind.pdf
McCarthy, J. (2007). From here to human-level AI. Artificial Intelligence, 171(18), 1174-
      1182.
Ng, D. T. K., Leung, J. K. L., Chu, K. W. S., & Qiao, M. S. (2021). AI literacy: Definition,
      teaching, evaluation and ethical issues. Proceedings of the Association for
      Information Science and Technology, 58(1), 504-509.
Russell Group. (2023). Russell Group principles on the use of generative AI tools in
      education. https://russellgroup.ac.uk/media/6137/rg_ai_principles-final.pdf
Ithaka          S-R.        (2024).       Generative        AI         Product       Tracker.
      https://docs.google.com/document/d/1yg7KJmMl7d_xZAGgHiXc-
      9iSNT5vmmp1iyK5zYcS2IE/edit?pli=1
UNESCO. (2022). Recommendations on the Ethics of Artificial Intelligence.
      https://www.unesco.org/en/artificial-intelligence/recommendation-ethics
UNESCO. (2023). ChatGPT and Artificial Intelligence in Higher Education. Quick Start
      Guide. https://www.iesalc.unesco.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/04/ChatGPT-and-
      Artificial-Intelligence-in-higher-education-Quick-Start-guide_EN_FINAL.pdf
Van Rossum, D. (2024). Generative AI Top 150: The World's Most Used AI Tools. FlexOS.
      https://www.flexos.work/learn/generative-ai-top-150
Vuorikari, R., Kluzer, S. and Punie, Y., (2022). DigComp 2.2: The Digital Competence
      Framework for Citizens - With new examples of knowledge, skills and attitudes, EUR
      31006        EN,      Publications     Office     of      the      European     Union.
      https://publications.jrc.ec.europa.eu/repository/handle/JRC128415
Webb,          M.         (2023).       A      Generative         AI       Primer.      JISC.
      https://nationalcentreforai.jiscinvolve.org/wp/2023/05/11/generative-ai-primer/
Zawacki-Richter, O., Marín, V. I., Bond, M., and Gouverneur, F. (2019). Systematic review of
      research on artificial intelligence applications in higher education – where are the
      educators? International Journal of Educational Technology in Higher Education,
      16(39).

                                                                                           7
