School of Visual Culture
Critical Cultures Research Project Handbook 2024-25
Contents
1. Introduction
2. Proposal
3. Choosing a Topic for the Critical Cultures Research Project
4. Research
5. The Role of the Supervisor
6. Writing the Critical Cultures Research Project
7. Guidelines for Critical Culture Research Project
7.1 Presentation
7.2 Organisation of Material
7.3 Methods of Citation
7.4 Bibliography
7.5 Quotations
7.6 Titles
7.7 Grammar, Spelling, Punctuation and Acronyms
8. Assessment Process and Criteria
9. Plagiarism
10. NCAD’s Generative AI Policy
11. Useful Resources
12. Access to Past Research Projects that Achieved A- and above
13. Queries

1

1. Introduction
Studio Programmes: In the final year of your studies you undertake two pieces of work which
will be combined to deliver a single grade for assessment:
Part 1) a substantial piece of research on a clearly defined topic related to Critical
Cultures. This forms 90% of the module;
Part 2) a short Catalogue Statement that critically contextualises your studio work. This
will appear in NCAD.WORKS, the online Degree Show Catalogue, in 2025. This forms
10% of the module.
This document does not cover Part 2. Further information will be supplied in the second
trimester of the year.
trimester 1 final year (90% of overall module
mark)
trimester 2 final year (10% of overall module
mark)

part 1: 6,000 word research project –
4pm Monday 27th January 2025
part 2: Catalogue Statement –
deadline tbc / early May, 2025

Education students: You will take one 5 credit module in semester 1 of year 3
semester 1 year 3 (100% of overall
module mark)

4,000 word research project – 4pm
Monday 13th Jan 2025

The research project and statement of practice are supported by lectures, group and
individual tutorials under the guidance of a supervisor.

2. Proposal
When you return to your studies in the autumn, you will be required to submit a Critical
Cultures Research Essay proposal as a pdf by email to ccresearchproject@staff.ncad.ie This
form will be required in the first week of the new trimester.
This short document will feature statements under the following headings:
Your proposal title / theme
What are the practices, concepts, issues or questions that you plan to write
about?
What sources have you consulted already?
What kind of research do you plan to do and what other sources will you
consult?
A copy of the form will be sent to you in advance. This form helps us allocate a supervisor to you.

2

3. Choosing a Topic for the Critical Cultures
Research Project
When selecting a research topic for part 1, consider the following questions:
•

Does this topic interest me, and will it maintain my interest?

If you don’t pick a topic that interests you, it is unlikely that the research project will interest
your reader. It is important when picking a topic for part 1 of your research project that you
are enthusiastic about your chosen topic.
This will make writing the research project more of a pleasure and less of a chore. Your part 2
topic must be your own studio practice.
•

How will I research this topic? What resources are available to me for research?

You need to consider where you will access information about the topic: from books, journal
articles, newspaper reviews, research centres such as NIVAL (National Irish Visual Arts
Library), interviews etc. Will you be able to access enough information to make this topic
viable? You also need to consider the quality and type of information available to you.
For example, can you access primary sources for this topic or will you be confined to
secondary sources? Is the literature published on this topic of a good academic standard? Is
the literature accessible?
•

What research methods will I use to examine this topic?

If your topic involves contrasting different types of images then your methodology may be
focused on visual analysis.
Other common methods used include object analysis (this method moves beyond considering
objects in terms of physical appearance, production and manufacture, to the social and
cultural meanings that objects embody) and philosophical inquiry (thinking critically about
issues within a field). The methodology you choose will influence the type of research you
conduct; more information about different research methods is given in Section D.
•

Is the topic manageable? Or is it too broad or too complex to cover competently in an
undergraduate research project?

Your research project should have a specific and central idea that gives focus and structure to
your work. You should avoid attempting an overview of a vast theme, spanning a long time
period, or addressing issues that are abstract and open ended; remember that the research
project length is 6,000 words. Ideally your research project should be centred on a coherent
research question.
•

How does this topic relate to my studio practice?

Part 1 of the research project will usually be relevant to your studio work, though this is not a
requirement. This means that theory and practice feed into each other.

3

4. Research
When the Critical Cultures Research Project is assessed, great credit is given for undertaking
thorough research.
Primary research means finding and analysing original sources. These can be of various kinds
including
•
•
•

Interviews with individuals who were/are centrally involved in the subject
of your thesis (e.g. artists and designers);
Unpublished documents like letters and sketches in archives;
In the case of historical subjects, magazine articles and exhibition catalogues
from the time or novels and other period materials such as films can often be
considered ‘primary evidence’

To give one example, NIVAL (the National Irish Visual Arts Library) at NCAD is a remarkably rich
source of primary documents such as exhibition catalogues. (http://nival.ncad.ie/INDEX.HTM),
Secondary sources are studies by others of your subject.
A good researcher should know what others have had to say about their subject and be able
to test their claims. Credit is given to Critical Cultures Research Projects that demonstrate a
thorough and often critical understanding of secondary sources.
The NCAD library is a key place to start for both primary and secondary research. Please note
that the library will not be accessible in the conventional way while Covid measures are in
place. You will be introduced to the new ‘reserve and collect’ service by the Library team. The
book and journal collection is excellent but the Library is also a portal to other libraries and
collections. You should make use of the electronic databases to which the library subscribes.
These databases are accessed through the NCAD Library catalogue
https://ncadlibrary.on.worldcat.org/discovery
The Library also subscribes to important online collections of academic journal articles such as
JStor. If you are not certain how to access these online resources, please talk to the library
staff and/or your tutor.
You will need precise references for all the sources you use, so keep a note of the author, title,
publisher, place of publication, and exact page numbers for ALL the material you consult. You
should pay particular attention to the footnotes and bibliography in the texts you read as these
will inevitably lead you to other useful sources.

5. The Role of the Supervisor

4

You will be allocated a supervisor who will support you in researching and writing your
Research Essay.
Your supervisor will provide regular, timetabled tutorials and help develop an appropriate
schedule to deliver successive stages of the project. You can expect to have approximately three
individual and two group tutorials with your supervisor for the duration of the project as well as
ongoing email contact. While your supervisor will encourage you to stick to this schedule, this is
your responsibility. Your tutor may also make suggestions regarding the direction of research in
terms, and suggest key texts. But it should also be noted that an important part of the research
process is for students themselves to find and identify useful sources.
Supervisors will keep (as you should) a record of each tutorial. This is to ensure that there is
understanding between supervisor and student regarding the content and direction of tutorials.
Your research project supervisor will provide appropriate and constructive feedback. It is
particularly important that you make good use of the draft chapter submission schedule.
Supervisors will also share key information through a Canvas site. You will receive an invite to
join this classroom early in the new academic year. Please accept this information. It will also
be the means by which you submit your Research Essay in 2025.
Please note that it is not the responsibility of the supervisor to proofread your draft chapter
submission.

6. Writing the Critical Cultures Research Project
The research project is an intensive process and it is important to be well organised. Because the
research project involves writing 6,000 words, the equivalent of two or three essays, many
students find it useful to begin writing as soon as possible, even before research is completed. If
you follow this strategy you can edit and update material as your research progresses.
It is very important to have clear aims and objectives. A topic with definite parameters, an exact
research question, and clarity concerning research methods, all make for an easier writing process.
While the word count may seem daunting, often the difficulty is in sticking to the word limit.
The key to managing the research project is to have a well worked out plan/outline.
Think of the research project as two or three interlinked essays, in addition to an introduction
and a conclusion. How you structure your research project depends on the topic and research
methodology. For example, you may be examining a topic in relation to specific case studies,
which each form a distinct chapter; in this case the structure of the research project is clear.

5

One recommended method for structuring the research project is to move from the general to
the particular, from a theoretical/historical overview to (theory informed) object analysis. If
you chose a chronological structure there should be a clear thematic development as well.
Begin thinking about the best structure for your research project as soon as possible. A good
research project has a clear structure with a logical positioning of material.
In November you will submit a 1,500-2,000-word portion of the Research Essay in the form of a
Draft Chapter. This is a formative assessment and does not carry a grade. However, every
student is required to submit the Draft Chapter as part of the planning process towards the
final assessment of your thesis. Your supervisor will communicate their specific requirements
for the Draft Chapter, and you will receive feedback on the submission during your tutorials.
The deadline for the Draft Chapter is early November (tbc) either directly to your tutor via
email or via Canvas.
You should pay close attention to the introduction and the conclusion, these are crucial parts of
the research project that introduce and define your argument and state the conclusions you
reached based on your research.
Usually, an introduction should do five things:
•
•
•
•
•

Set out the parameters of your topic - What topic are you exploring? What are the
limits of your enquiry? How has this area been considered by others?
State the concepts and theories that inform your topic.
Outline your objectives - what is/are your research question/s?
Outline your research methods.
Give an outline of the research project, indicating what the chapters will
explore... etc.

Your conclusion should restate the research question and briefly summarise the content (but
you should avoid lengthy repetition of material from the main body). The conclusion might also
outline the limitations of your enquiry and possible areas for future work. Were there aspects of
the topic that you were unable to discuss due to limitations of space or for practical reasons?
What were the limitations of the research methodology you employed? Your conclusion might
make recommendations based on your research, in terms of future policy in an area, or in terms
of suggesting future areas of research.
Crucially you need to answer the research question(s) posited at the beginning of the research
project and draw some firm conclusions in relation to the issues raised in your introduction and
explored in the main body. It is important that you write concisely and with clarity. While you
may want to display your knowledge, or increase the sophistication of your argument, through
using discipline specific, academic language, you should aim for clarity and coherence. If you
struggle with articulating your ideas clearly and effectively you should contact the Student
Learning Support Service, an invaluable resource for NCAD students. The service organises
group tutorials on writing and research skills specifically designed to help with the research
project, and can also arrange for individual tuition.

6

https://www.ncad.ie/students/support-services/student-learning-support-service/
You also need to pay close attention to the presentation of your research project. Your research
project should be properly referenced and contain a detailed bibliography. You should provide
illustrations for images or objects discussed at length in the research project. Section H outlines
the academic guidelines for research project presentation.

7. Guidelines for Critical Culture Research Project
7.1 Presentation
Length / Word Count
Studio students: part 1: 6,000 word research project
Education students: year 3 trimester 1: 4,000 word research project
The word count should be stated on the front page of the Research Essay. In calculating the text,
only include the body of the text. Do not include the acknowledgements, the title page, image
captions, bibliography.
We will accept essays which are 10% over or under the word count. They will be marked without a
grade penalty. If the piece is longer or shorter, a grade penalty may be applied by the assessors.
Format
Typewritten on A4 formatted pages with 12 point Arial or Times New Roman font. Margin at
left edge not less than 40mm and other margins not less than 20mm, both for type and
diagrams/images. Any departure from this format needs to be agreed by your tutor.
Double or one-and-a-half spacing except for long quotations which should be indented and
single line spaced.
Number all pages, including preliminaries and appendices. While all pages are counted, not all
carry a typed number, i.e. the title page, contents page. Page numbers should be located
centrally at the bottom of the page and about 20mm above the edge of the page
The Critical Cultures Research Project should be prepared as a PDF which is capable of being
printed (e.g. using A4 pages).

7

Submission
Students should submit a PDF of Part 1 (Research Essay) to Canvas by 4pm on Monday 27th
January (or 4pm 13th January for Education students).
At the same time, s/he should submit a PDF electronically to
ccresearchproject@staff.ncad.ie – an invitation will be sent nearer the time.
Your PDF should have a file name containing this information SURNAME_PROGRAMME_DATE.pdf
e.g. Tierney_Painting_10Jan2022.pdf

After examination, some copies of some Critical Cultures Research Projects will be retained by
the Library. This is so that future students and other researchers can consult some of the best
work. Users must undertake not to use or reproduce material without the consent of the
Librarian and must duly acknowledge the source of such information.

7.2 Organisation of Material
Title Page
Please list information in the following order:
National College of Art & Design Department, School
Title of research project
Name of student
School / Department
Year
Word Count
Submitted to the School of Visual Culture in Candidacy for the Degree of
… (name of degree, year of submission)
Declaration of Own Work
Please complete the declaration statement and include it in the research essay.
Format for declaration can be downloaded from the School of Students>Programme
Information>Critical Cultures section of the NCAD website (scroll down)
https://www.ncad.ie/files/undergrad_files/Critical_Cultures_Declaration_2023-24.doc
Acknowledgements

8

Only persons and organisations who aided research (not typist, parents, etc.) should be
mentioned.
Table of Contents
Complete list of contents including list of illustrations and headings of chapters or brief
indication of their contents, appendices, and bibliography together with page numbers.
List of Illustrations
This should include artist/designer, title, date, medium, dimensions and the current location of
the work, together with page numbers locating each image.
Introduction
An outline of the main argument, methodology and literature review.
Chapters
Subtitles are recommended for use within chapters to subdivide material.
Conclusion
A summary of main points and assessment of results.
Appendices
Glossary, detailed data, technical information, questionnaires or the full text of an interview
may be included here. Please discuss with your tutor before including any appendices. They are
not a requirement.
Appendices should be given a title and should be numbered in sequence with the rest of the pages
of the text.
Bibliography
Lists of sources used, including all items which appear in the references within the text as well as
material used for background reading on the subject.
Illustrations
Illustrations should be sequentially numbered, fig. 1, 2 etc. with captions indicating their
identity.
All illustrations should relate directly to the text and should be located as close as possible to
the relevant part of the text.
Photographs or diagrams should also be related clearly to the text, and should be listed with
sources given. The pages on which illustrations appear should be numbered in sequence with
the rest of the pages in the text.

9

7.8 Methods of Citation
NCAD employs the Harvard Referencing Style. All statements, opinions, conclusions, etc.
taken from another writer’s work should be cited, whether the work is directly quoted,
paraphrased or summarised. It is necessary to acknowledge sources so that it is clear when
you are making use of another author’s material.
In the Harvard System, cited publications are referred to in the text by giving the author’s
surname and the year of publication (see section 8 below) and are listed in a bibliography at
the end of the text (see section 9 below).
The person or organisation shown most prominently in the source as responsible for the
content in its published form should be given.
For anonymous works use ‘Anon’ instead of a name.
For certain kinds of work, e.g. dictionaries or encyclopedias, or if an item is the co-operative
work of many individuals, none of whom have a dominant role, e.g. videos or films, the title
may be used instead of an originator or author.
If an exact year or date is not known, an approximate date preceded by ‘ca.’ may be supplied
and given in square brackets. If no such approximation is possible that should be stated, e.g.
[ca. 1750] or [no date].
Citations in the Text
You should cite the surname of the author or editor, the year of publication and page
number(s) in brackets in your text. If a name occurs naturally in your text, add the date and
page number(s) only.
Example 1
“Things begin to change at the time of the Renaissance due to a new consciousness in the
European mind” (Amin, 1989, p. 79).
Example 2
According to Amin a new consciousness in the European mind resulted in things
changing around the time of the Renaissance (1989, p. 75).
If you are directly quoting a source without a page number such as a website use the
abbreviation n.p. for ‘no pagination’ i.e. (Tolentino, 2019, n.p.).
If the same author has two or more publications in the same year, the sources are distinguished
by lower-case letters (a, b, c, and so on), e.g. (Amin, 1989a, p. 75).
If there are two authors the surnames of both should be given, if there are more than three
authors the surname of the first author only should be given followed by et al. (A full listing of
names should appear in the bibliography).
Example 3
10

Studies show that “learners prefer to have full control over their instructional options”
(Colvin et al. 2003, p. 34)
If a work is anonymous the title of the work should be used
Example 4
The Percy tom has been described as “one of the master-pieces of medieval European
art” (Treasures of Britain, 1990, p. 84)
If you refer to a source quoted within another source you cite both in the text. You only list
the source you have read in your bibliography (in the example given below you would include
Jones but not Smith in the bibliography).
Example 5
A study by Smith argues that ... (1998, cited in Jones, 2005, p. 24)
You should also provide references for personal communications such as face-to- face or
telephone conversations, letters and email. These citations should begin with the name of the
sender of the communication and give the year.
Importantly you may need to seek permission from other parties in the
correspondence/conversation before quoting them in your work.
Numbered footnotes or endnotes are only used to comment on the text or provide further
information. If these contain a citation, it should be in the same format as those in the text.

7.9 Bibliography
All sources of information that have been used should be listed in your bibliography including
interviews and unpublished material. The references are listed in alphabetical order of authors'
names. Put the surname first, followed by the initial(s) of forename(s). If you have cited more
than one item by a specific author they should be listed chronologically (earliest first), and by
letter (1993a, 1993b) if more than one item has been published in a particular year.
Books
Author (or editor), (year of publication in brackets), Title in Italics. Edition (if not the first). place
of publication:publisher.
Example 1
Poyner, R. (1998) Design without Boundaries. London: Booth-Clibborn Editions.
Example 2
Wells, L. (ed.) (2004) Photography: A Critical Introduction. 3rd ed. London: Routledge.

11

Chapters
For chapters or individual essays in books/exhibition catalogues, etc. (when essays or chapters
have different authors): author (surname first), year (in brackets), ‘title of chapter or essay’ (in
inverted commas), then write ‘in’ followed by name & initial of editor/overall author, title in
italics, place of publication: publisher, page number(s).
Example
Smith, P. J. (1997) ‘British Art in the 1980s and 1990s’ in Murphy, B. (ed), Art from Britain,
Sidney: Museum of Contemporary Art, pp. 147-159.
Articles
For articles in a journal, author of article (surname first), (year of publication), ‘title of article’
(in inverted commas), title of journal in italics, volume number (part number), page numbers of
article.
Example
Dawes, J. and Rowley, J. (1998) ‘Enhancing the customer experience: contributions
from information technology’, Management Decision , 36(5), pp. 350-357.
Newspaper Articles
Where the author of a newspaper article is identified, use the following citation order: Author
(Year of Publication) ‘Title of article’, Title of Newspaper in Italics, day and month, page
number(s). Where no author is given, use the following citation order: Title of Newspaper (Year
of Publication) ‘Title of Article’, day and month, page reference.
Example 1
Marlow, L (1997) ‘Sarkozy suffers setback as party loses assembly seats’,
Irish Times, 18 June, p. 1.
Example 2
Independent (1992) ‘Picking up the Bills’, 4 June, p.28.
Theses
A reference for a research project should give the Author (Year of Publication) Title of
Research project in Italics. Degree statement. Degree awarding body.
Example

12

Clancy, L. (2008) Dead air: live art; schizophonia and double coding in broadcast radio .
Unpublished PhD research project. National University of Ireland.
Exhibition Catalogues
For Exhibition Catalogues with no author, the organiser should be cited as author.
Example
Arts Council (1970) Art in Turmoil, London: Serpentine Gallery.
Conference Papers
For conference papers use the following citation order: Author(s) of paper (Year of publication)
'Title of Paper', in author/editor of proceedings (if applicable) Title of Conference proceedings,
location and date of conference. Place of Publication: Publisher, page numbers of contribution.
Example 1
Kelly, N. A. and Hanrahan, S. (2004) ‘Critical Theory on Practice-Based Courses’, in
Davies, A.(ed.) Enhancing Curricula: towards the scholarship of teaching in art, design,
and communication in Higher Education, Barcelona , 15th-16th April. London: Centre
of Learning and Teaching in Art and Design,
pp. 232-334.
Example 2
Hartnett, J.P. (2010) ‘Derrida by Default: Wolfgang Weingart and the accidental
deconstruction of Swiss typography’ Irish Association of Art Historians/Artefact Study
Day, Dublin, 10 April.
Television Programmes
For television programmes the citation order is as follows: Title of programme (Year of
transmission) Name of channel, date of transmission (day/month). For episodes of a television
series the citation order is as follows: ‘Title of episode’ (Year of transmission) Title of
Programme, series and episode numbers. Name of channel, date of transmission (day/month).
Example 1
Little Britain (2005) BBC 2 Television, 23 June.
Example 2
‘A Day in the Death’ (2008) Torchwood , Series 2, episode 10. BBC 2 Television, 5
March.

13

Films
For films the citation order is as follows: Title of film (Year of Distribution) Director [Material
designation]. Place of distribution: Distribution Company.
Example 1
Macbeth (1948) Directed by Orson Welles [Film]. USA: Republic Pictures.
Example 2
The Matrix Reloaded (2003) Directed by A. & L. Wachowski [DVD]. Los Angelus:
Warner Brothers Inc.
For films on Youtube the citation order is as follows: Name of person posting video (Year video
posted) Title of film or programme. Available at: URL (Accessed: date).
Example 3
No Man (2008) For a Cooler Tube. Available at:
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jXE6G9CYcJs (Accessed: 13 June 12
2008).
Interviews and other Personal Communications
For interviews, cite the interviewer as author, followed by year (in brackets), then give the
medium of communication (interview, telephone conversation), interviewee or receiver of
communication, and finally the day/month of communication. Similar references should be
given for correspondence in the form of letters, e-mails etc.
Example 1
Healy, C. (2010) Interview with Stephen Nolan, 6 April.
Example 2
Collins, P. (2009) Email to Mary Kelly, 5 September.
Web Resources
For websites, web pages or e-books cite as much of the following as possible: author/ editor’s
name (Year in brackets), Title in Italics. Place of Publication: Publisher (if ascertainable).
Available from: URL (Accessed: date)
References to material from the internet in the main body of the research project should be
made in the same way as for other material, e.g. (Holland, 2004)
Example 1
Holland, M. (2004) Guide to Citing Internet Sources . Poole: Bournemouth University.
Available at:
http://www.bournemouth.ac.uk.library/using/guide_to_citing_internet_source s.html
(Accessed: 4 November 2020).

14

References to e-journals are similar to those for articles but you must also supply the name of
the online collection, URL of collection and the date accessed. The citation order is as follows:
Author (Year) ‘Title’ Journal Title, volume (issue), page numbers Name of Collection [Online],
Available At: URL (Accessed: date)
Example 2
Bright, M. (1985) ‘The poetry of art’, Journal of the History of Ideas, 46 (2), pp 250-277,
JSTOR [online]. Available at: http://www.jstor.org/ (Accessed: 16 June 2008).
For podcasts reference is made to where it was published or displayed for download, and the
citation order is as follows: Author/Presenter (Year site was published/last updated) ‘Title of
Podcast’, Title of Internet site [Podcast]. Day/month of posted message. Available at: URL
(Accessed: date)
Example 3
Ndiritu, G. (2019) ‘Questions from the past’, Tate Events [Podcast]. 2 February
Available at:
http://www.tate.org.uk/onlineevents/podcast/mp3/2010_02_12_Grace_Ndirit u.mp3
(Accessed: 11 April 2010).
When citing sources such as online discussion forums you should bear in mind that items may
only be kept on discussion group servers for a short time and so may not be suitable for
referencing. When citing mailbase/listserv email lists the format is as follows: Author (Year of
message) 'Subject of message', Discussion List, date posted: day/month [Online]. Available at:
list email address
Example 4
McKenzie, J. (2007) ‘Re: call for artists’, The UK drawing research network mailing list,
25 May [Online]. Available email: drawing- research@jiscmail.ac.uk.

7.5 Quotations
Quotations can be an invaluable tool to demonstrate your research knowledge; however, you
should avoid the overuse of quotations. In general quotes should relate to points that you want
to make and you should explain and expand on the quotes you use.
For quotes of less than three lines, use double quotation marks and keep the quote within the
body of the main text.
For short quotations within a quotation, use double, then single quotation marks,
e.g. “Jan Assman says that ‘ritual is more than an ornamentation of time’, but it is also just
that" (Luhman, 2000, p.227).

15

Longer quotations of over three lines do not use quotation marks; instead indent the entire
quote from the margins in block form and typed single space. When using a quote within a
longer quotation simply use single quotation marks.
When material is omitted, the ellipsis is indicated by the use of three dots.

7.6 Titles
Titles of books, films, periodicals and artworks should be placed in italics and should not be put
in inverted commas.

7.7 Grammar, Spelling, Punctuation and Acronyms
All text must be carefully checked for grammar and spelling. When using a spell- check facility
make sure it is using British/Hibernian spelling. For example:
colour not color;
behaviour not behavior; programme not program;
[she] practises not practices; centre not center; organisation not organization; analyse not
analyze etc.
Take particular care with words in capital letters as many spell checks will skip these.
Dashes should be clearly indicated by way of a clear dash, with a space before and after:
( – ).
However, a hyphen is neither preceded nor followed by a space: e.g. word- processor.
Apostrophes should be used sparingly. Thus, decades should be referred to as follows: 1990s
(not 1990’s). Note that the term ‘it’s’ means ‘it is’. The apostrophe denotes the missing ‘I’. To
indicate possession, the pronoun ‘it’ uses no apostrophe: ‘every dog has its day.’
Possessives associated with acronyms (for example NCAD) should be given an
apostrophe: ‘NCAD’s findings suggest that...’
All acronyms for national agencies, examinations etc. should be spelled out the first time they
are introduced in text or reference. Thereafter the acronym can be used if appropriate. For
example: ‘Students in the National College of Art and Design (NCAD) have said...’
Departures from these Guidelines must be discussed and agreed with your supervisor.

8. Assessment Process and Criteria

16

Your research project will be marked and graded by your supervisor and will also be read by a
second internal reader, to ensure an objective and consistent grading.
A sample of research projects is considered by an external examiner as part of their annual visit
to NCAD.
Assessment report
Your research project will be assessed under the following headings:
LEARNING OUTCOME 1 PLAN: Undertake self-directed research using
appropriate time management skills, including tutorial attendance, participation and
timely draft submission
LEARNING OUTCOME 2 RESEARCH: Evidence a critical understanding of the
key theories, practices and methods that inform the research project and employ an
appropriate range of research strategies and sources.
LEARNING OUTCOME 3 ANALYSE: Synthesise and reflect critically on the results of your
research and practice.
LEARNING OUTCOME 4 COMMUNICATE: Demonstrate your ability to manage, structure
and resolve an extended essay and a statement of practice presented in
an appropriate and coherent form.
Grade descriptors
The descriptions of the various grades employed by NCAD in assessment are set out in the
table here. It is used by staff when assessing all work at NCAD (and not just Critical Cultures
assignments).
All the grades listed overleaf can be affected downwards by inadequacies of bibliography,
references, poor language expression, lack of adherence to academic conventions, excessive
length or brevity, superfluous illustrations, absence of proper introduction and/or conclusion,
as well as poor tutorial attendance.
Work cannot be marked in cases of plagiarism.
Late submission
Work submitted late incurs the following penalties:
Where a student submits a piece of work late without any mitigating circumstances (such as in
the case of illness with a supporting doctor’s note) the following penalties will apply:
- 1 week late (from Day 1 after
submission deadline, up to and including
Day 7)
- 2 weeks late (from Day 8 up to and
including Day 14)
Coursework/essays that are more than two
weeks late will not be graded.

Minus 2 grades: A+ → APenalty: Minus 4 grades: A+ → B
Where an essay is over 2 weeks late
you will have failed the assessment and will
be required to resit or repeat the
17

failed module. Normally, the maximum
grade possible from a resit or a repeat
is D-.

9. Plagiarism
Definition
Plagiarism is defined as presenting someone else’s work, writing or ideas as one’s own.
Plagiarism can take many forms:
•
•
•

presenting work authored by another person, including other students, friends, family
etc.
presenting work purchased through internet services
presenting work extracted from books, magazines or the internet, without
appropriate citation.

Types of Plagiarism
The most serious forms of plagiarism are as follows:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Word for Word Plagiarism:
Direct lifting of phrases or passages from the Internet or published texts without
quotation or citation.
Plagiarism of Authorship:
Putting one’s own name to someone else’s work.
The Falsification of Research Findings:
Fabricating statistics or interviews which are not the results of research
carried out by the student.
Receiving undue help from someone other than one’s tutor:
Getting undue help from another person, including friend or family member.
Use of Online Essay Banks (internet sites to purchase essays or research project
material).

NCAD Plagiarism Policy
Plagiarism is a serious academic issue and all alleged instances of plagiarism will be fully
investigated. Details of the policy can be found here
https://www.ncad.ie/files/download/Plagiarism_Policy__Procedures.pdf

18

10.

NCAD’s Generative AI Policy

The School of Visual Culture does not permit the use of generative AI in the research and writing
of Critical Cultures assignments. Full details can be found here.

11.

Useful Resources

Some useful general texts on academic research and writing are listed below. Some of these
texts can be borrowed from the NCAD Library:
Bailey, S. (2003) Academic Writing: A Practical Guide for Students . London: Routledge
Falmer.
Bauer, M.W. and Gaskell, G. (eds.) (2000) Qualitative Researching with Text, Image and
Sound: A Practical Handbook . London: Sage.
Blaxter, L., Hughes, C. and Tight, M. (2006) How to Research . Milton Keynes: Open
University Press.
Booth, W., Colomb, G. and Williams, J. (1995) The Craft of Research . Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Chambers, E. and Northedge, A. (1998) The Arts Good Study Guide , Milton Keynes: Open
University Press.
Clough, P. and Nutbrown, C. (2007) A Student's Guide to Methodology: Justifying Enquiry .
London: Sage.
Creswell, J.W. (2009) Research Design: Qualitative, Quantitative and Mixed Method
Approaches . London: Sage.
Dillard, Annie (1989) The Writing Life . New York: HarperPerennial.
Francis, Pat (2009) Inspiring Writing in Art & Design: Taking a Line for a Write
. Bristol: intellect.
Pears, R. and Shields, G. (2008) Cite them right: the essential referencing guide . Durham:
Pear Tree Books.
Perks, R. and Thompson, A. (eds.) (2006) The Oral History Reader . London: Routledge.
Prose, Francine (2006) Reading Like a Writer. New York: HarperCollins.
Rose, Gillian (2000) Visual Methodologies: An Introduction to Interpreting Visual
Objects . London: Sage.
Rumsey, Sally (2004) How to find Information: A guide for Researchers . Milton Keynes:
Open University Press.
Sword, Helen (2012) Stylish Academic Writing . Harvard University Press.
Truss, Lynne (2003) Eats, Shoots & Leaves: The Zero Tolerance Approach to Punctuation
. London: Profile Books.
Walliman, N. (2004) Your Undergraduate Dissertation: The Essential Guide for Success .
London: Sage.
Walliman, N. (2005) Your Research Project: A Step-by-Step Guide for the First-time
Researcher. London: Sage.

12.

Access to Past Research Projects that Achieved A19

and above
The library keeps copies of high-achieving research projects. Please ask the library staff how to
access them.

13. Queries
Queries about the research project process should be addressed in the first instance to your
research project supervisor. Further queries can be addressed to the Critical Cultures secretary
at visualculture@staff.ncad.ie

20
